In this chapter…
The first few years in the life of independent India were full of challenges. 
Some of the most pressing ones concerned national unity and 
territorial integrity of India. We begin the story of politics in India since 
Independence by looking at how three of these challenges of nation-
building were successfully negotiated in the first decade after 1947. 
• 
Freedom came with Partition, which resulted in large scale violence 
and displacement and challenged the very idea of a secular India.  
• 
The integration of the princely states into the Indian union needed 
urgent resolution.  
• 
The internal boundaries of the country needed to be drawn afresh to 
meet the aspirations of the people who spoke different languages.  
In the next two chapters we shall turn to other kinds of challenges faced 
by the country in this early phase.
Credit: Sunil Janah
In a moment of 
optimism, Hindus and 
Hindus and Muslims in 
Kolkata in 1947 marked 
the end of communal 
violence by jointly flying 
the flags of India and 
Pakistan from trucks 
patrolling the city. 
This rare photograph 
captured the joy of 
freedom and the tragedy 
of partition in India and 
in Pakistan.  
2018-19
Challenge  for the new nation
At the hour of midnight on 14-15 August 1947, India attained independence. 
Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of free India, addressed a special session of 
the Constituent Assembly that night. This was the famous ‘tryst with destiny’ speech 
that you are familiar with. 
This was the moment Indians had been waiting for.  You have read in your history 
textbooks that there were many voices in our national movement. But there were 
two goals almost everyone agreed upon: one, that after Independence, we shall run 
our country through democratic government; and two, that the government will be 
run for the good of all, particularly the poor and the socially disadvantaged groups. 
Now that the country was independent, the time had come to realise the promise of 
freedom.
This was not going to be easy. India was born in very difficult circumstances. 
Perhaps no other country by then was born in a situation more difficult than that of 
India in 1947. Freedom came with the partition of the country. The year 1947 was a 
year of unprecedented violence and trauma of displacement. It was in this situation 
that independent India started on its journey to achieve several objectives. Yet the 
turmoil that accompanied independence did not make our leaders lose sight of the 
multiple challenges that faced the new nation. 
challenges of 
nation building
1
chapter
Credit: PIB
Prime Minister Jawahar 
Lal Nehru speaking from 
the Red Fort, 
15 August 1947
2018-19
4                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
Three Challenges 
Broadly, independent India faced three kinds of challenges. The first 
and the immediate challenge was to shape a nation that was united, 
yet accommodative of the diversity in our society. India was a land of 
continental size and diversity. Its people spoke different languages 
and followed different cultures and religions. At that time it was 
widely believed that a country full of such kinds of diversity could 
not remain together for long. The partition of the country appeared to 
prove everyone’s worst fears. There were serious questions about the 
future of India: Would India survive as a unified country? Would it do 
so by emphasising national unity at the cost of every other objective? 
Would it mean rejecting all regional and sub-national identities? And 
there was an urgent question: How was integration of the territory of 
India to be achieved?
The second challenge was to establish democracy. You have 
already studied the Indian Constitution. You know that the 
Constitution granted fundamental rights and extended the right to 
vote to every citizen. India adopted representative democracy based 
on the parliamentary form of government. These features ensure that 
the political competition would take place in a democratic framework. 
Hindustan Times, 19 July 1947
 
Tomor ow we shall be 
f ee f om the slavery o  the 
British domination. But 
at midnight India will be 
partitioned. Tomor ow will 
thus be a day o  rejoicing as 
well as o  mourning.
Mahatma Gandhi  
14 August 1947, 
Kolkata.
“
“
2018-19
Challenge  o  Nation Building                                                                              5  
A democratic constitution is necessary but not sufficient for 
establishing a democracy. The challenge was to develop democratic 
practices in accordance with the Constitution.
The third challenge was to ensure the development and well-
being of the entire society and not only of some sections. Here again 
the Constitution clearly laid down the principle of equality and 
special protection to socially disadvantaged groups and religious and 
cultural communities. The Constitution also set out in the Directive 
Principles of State Policy the welfare goals that democratic politics 
must achieve.  The real challenge now was to evolve effective policies 
for economic development and eradication of poverty.
How did independent India respond to these challenges? To what 
extent did India succeed in achieving the various objectives set out 
by the Constitution? This entire book is an attempt to respond to 
these questions. The book tells the story of politics in India since 
Independence so as to equip you to develop your own answers to 
big questions like these. In the first three chapters we look at how 
the three challenges mentioned above were faced in the early years 
after Independence.
In this chapter, we focus on the first challenge of nation-
building that occupied centre-stage in the years immediately after 
Independence.  We begin by looking at the events that formed the 
context of Independence.  This can help us understand why the 
issue of national unity and security became a primary challenge 
at the time of Independence. We shall then see how India chose to 
shape itself into a nation, united by a shared history and common 
destiny.  This unity had to reflect the aspirations of people across 
the different regions and deal with the disparities that existed 
among regions and different sections of people. In the next two 
chapters we shall turn to the challenge of establishing a democracy 
and achieving economic development with equality and justice.
I always wanted a time 
machine, so that I can 
go back and participate 
in the celebrations of 
15 August 1947. But 
this looks different 
from what I thought.
These three stamps were issued in 1950 to mark the first Republic Day on 26 January 1950. What 
do the images on these stamps tell you about the challenges to the new republic? If you were asked 
to design these stamps in 1950, which images would you have chosen?
2018-19
6                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
The Dawn of Freedom
Faiz Ahmed Faiz
This scarred, marred brightness,   
 
 
 
 
this bitten-by-night dawn -
The one that was awaited, surely, this is not that dawn.
This is not the dawn yearning for which
Had we set out, friends, hoping to find  
 
 
sometime, somewhere
The final destination of stars in the wilderness of the sky.
Somewhere, at least, must be a shore for the languid   
waves of the night,
Somewhere at least must anchor the sad   
 
 
boat of the heart …
Translation of an extract from Urdu poem  Subh-e-azadi
We should begin to work in that spirit and in course of time all these 
angularities of the majority and minority communities, the Hindu community 
and the Muslim community – because even as regards Muslims you have 
Pathans, Punjabis, Shias, Sunnis and so on and among the Hindus you have 
Brahmins, Vaishnavas, Khatris, also Bengalees, Madrasis, and so on – will 
vanish. … You are free; you are free to go to your temples, you are free to 
go to your mosques or to any other place of worship in this State of Pakistan. 
You may belong to any religion or caste or creed – that has nothing to do with 
the business of the State. 
Mohammad Ali Jinnah, Presidential Address to the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan at 
Karachi,  11 August 1947.
Faiz Ahmed Faiz (1911-1984) Born 
in Sialkot; stayed in Pakistan after 
Partition. A leftist in his political 
leanings, he opposed the Pakistani 
regime and was imprisoned. Collections 
of his poetry include Naksh-e-Fariyadi, 
Dast-e-Saba and Zindan-Nama. 
Regarded as one of the greatest poets 
of South Asia in the twentieth century.
med Faiz (1911 1984) Bo
Dawn, Karachi, 14 August 1947
6                                                                    P
2018-19
Challenge  o  Nation Building                                                                              7  
Today I call Waris Shah
Amrita Pritam
Today, I call Waris Shah, “Speak from your grave”
And turn, today, the book of love’s next affectionate page
Once, a daughter of Punjab cried and you wrote a wailing saga
Today, a million daughters, cry to you, Waris Shah
Rise! O’ narrator of the grieving; rise! look at your Punjab
Today, fields are lined with corpses, and blood fills the Chenab
Someone has mixed poison in the five rivers’ flow
Their deadly water is, now, irrigating our lands galore
This fertile land is sprouting, venom from every pore
The sky is turning red from endless cries of gore
The toxic forest wind, screams from inside its wake
Turning each flute’s bamboo-shoot, into a deadly snake …
Translation of an extract from a Punjabi poem “Aaj Akhan Waris Shah Nun” 
We have a Muslim minority who are so large in numbers that they cannot, 
even if they want, go anywhere else. That is a basic fact about which there can 
be no argument. Whatever the provocation from Pakistan and whatever the 
indignities and horrors inflicted on non-Muslims there, we have got to deal with 
this minority in a civilised manner. We must give them security and the rights of 
citizens in a democratic State. If we fail to do so, we shall have a festering sore 
which will eventually poison the whole body politic and probably destroy it. 
Jawaharlal Nehru, Letter to Chief Ministers, 15 October 1947.
Amrita Pritam (1919–2005): 
A prominent Punjabi poet and 
fiction writer. Recipient of Sahitya 
Akademi Award, Padma Shree and 
Jnanapeeth Award. After Partition 
she made Delhi her second home. 
She was active in writing and 
editing ‘Nagmani’ a Punjabi monthly 
magazine till her last.
it
P it
(1919 2005)
The Times of India, Bombay, 15 August 1947
                                                                                                                             7  
2018-19
8                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
Partition: displacement and rehabilitation
On 14-15 August 1947, not one but two nation-states came into 
existence – India and Pakistan.  This was a result of ‘partition’, 
the division of British India into India and Pakistan.  The drawing 
of the border demarcating the territory of each country marked the 
culmination of political developments that you have read about in 
the history textbooks. According to the ‘two-nation theory’ advanced 
by the Muslim League, India consisted of not one but two ‘people’, 
Hindus and Muslims. That is why it demanded Pakistan, a separate 
country for the Muslims. The Congress opposed this theory and the 
demand for Pakistan. But several political developments in 1940s, the 
political competition between the Congress and the Muslim League 
and the British role led to the decision for the creation of Pakistan. 
Process of Partition
Thus it was decided that what was till then known as ‘India’ would 
be divided into two countries, ‘India’ and ‘Pakistan’. Such a division 
was not only very painful, but also very difficult to decide and to 
implement. It was decided to follow the principle of religious majorities. 
This basically means that areas where the Muslims were in majority 
would make up the territory of Pakistan. The rest was to stay with 
India. 
The idea might appear simple, but it presented all kinds of 
difficulties. First of all, there was no single belt of Muslim majority 
areas in British India. There were two areas of concentration, one 
in the west and one in the east. There was no way these two parts 
could be joined. So it was decided that the new country, Pakistan, will 
comprise two territories, West and East Pakistan separated by a long 
expanse of Indian territory.  Secondly, not all Muslim majority areas 
wanted to be in Pakistan. Khan Abdul Gaffar Khan, the undisputed 
leader of the North Western Frontier Province and known as ‘Frontier 
Gandhi’, was staunchly opposed to the two-nation theory. Eventually, 
his voice was simply ignored and the NWFP was made to merge with 
Pakistan. 
The third problem was that two of the Muslim majority provinces 
of British India, Punjab and Bengal, had very large areas where the 
non-Muslims were in majority. Eventually it was decided that these 
two provinces would be bifurcated according to the religious majority 
at the district or even lower level. This decision could not be made 
by the midnight of 14-15 August. It meant that a large number of 
people did not know on the day of Independence whether they were in 
India or in Pakistan. The Partition of these two provinces caused the 
deepest trauma of Partition.
This was related to the fourth and the most intractable of all the 
problems of partition. This was the problem of ‘minorities’ on both 
Oh, now I 
understand! What 
was ‘East’ Bengal 
has now become 
Bangladesh. That is 
why our Bengal is 
called ‘West’ Bengal!
2018-19
Challenge  o  Nation Building                                                                              9  
sides of the border. Lakhs of Hindus and Sikhs in the areas that 
were now in Pakistan and an equally large number of Muslims on 
the Indian side of Punjab and Bengal (and to some extent Delhi and 
surrounding areas) found themselves trapped. They were to discover 
that they were undesirable aliens in their own home, in the land 
where they and their ancestors had lived for centuries. As soon as 
it became clear that the country was going to be partitioned, the 
minorities on both sides became easy targets of attack. No one had 
quite anticipated the scale of this problem. No one had any plans for 
handling this. Initially, the people and political leaders kept hoping 
that this violence was temporary and would be controlled soon. But 
very soon the violence went out of control. The minorities on both 
sides of the border were left with no option except to leave their 
homes, often at a few hours’ notice. 
Consequences of Partition
The year 1947 was the year of one of the largest, most abrupt, 
unplanned and tragic transfer of population that human history 
has known. There were killings and atrocities on both sides of the 
border. In the name of religion people of one community ruthlessly 
killed and maimed people of the other community. Cities like Lahore, 
A train full of ‘refugees’ in 1947.
Credit: DPA.
2018-19
10                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
Amritsar and Kolkata became divided into 
‘communal zones’. Muslims would avoid 
going into an area where mainly Hindus 
or Sikhs lived; similarly the Hindus and 
Sikhs stayed away from areas of Muslim 
predominance. 
Forced to abandon their homes and 
move across borders, people went through 
immense sufferings. Minorities on both 
sides of the border fled their home and 
often secured temporary shelter in ‘refugee 
camps’. They often found unhelpful local 
administration and police in what was till 
recently their own country. They travelled 
to the other side of the new border by all 
sorts of means, often by foot.  Even during 
this journey they were often attacked, 
killed or raped. Thousands of women were 
abducted on both sides of the border. They 
were made to convert to the religion of the 
abductor and were forced into marriage. In many cases women were 
killed by their own family members to preserve the ‘family honour’. 
Many children were separated from their parents. Those who did 
manage to cross the border found that they had no home. For lakhs 
of these ‘refugees’ the 
country’s freedom meant 
life in ‘refugee camps’, for 
months and sometimes 
for years.
Writers, poets and 
film-makers in India and 
Pakistan have expressed 
the ruthlessness of the 
killings and the suffering 
of 
displacement 
and 
violence in their novels, 
short-stories, poems and 
films. While recounting 
the trauma of Partition, 
they have often used the 
phrase that the survivors 
themselves 
used 
to 
describe Partition —  as 
a ‘division of hearts’.  
The 
Partition 
was 
not merely a division 
of properties, liabilities 
Hospitality Delayed
Saadat Hasan Manto
Rioters brought the running train to a halt. 
People belonging to the other community 
were pulled out and slaughtered with swords 
and bullets.
The remaining passengers were treated to 
halwa, fruits and milk.
The chief organiser said, ‘Brothers and 
sisters, news of this train’s arrival was 
delayed. That is why we have not been 
able to entertain you lavishly – the way we 
wanted to.’
Source: English translation of Urdu short 
story Kasre-Nafsi
Gandhi in Noakhali (now in Bangladesh) in 1947.
Credit: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library
2018-19
Challenge  o  Nation Building                                                                              11  
and assets, or a political division of 
the country and the administrative 
apparatus. What also got divided were 
the financial assets, and things like 
tables, chairs, typewriters, paper-clips, 
books and also musical instruments 
of the police band! The employees of 
the government and the railways were 
also ‘divided’. Above all, it was a violent 
separation of communities who had 
hitherto lived together as neighbours. 
It is estimated that the Partition forced 
about 80 lakh people to migrate across 
the new border. Between five to ten lakh 
people were killed in Partition related 
violence. 
 Beyond the administrative concerns 
and financial strains, however, the 
Partition posed another deeper issue. 
The leaders of the Indian national 
struggle did not believe in the two-nation 
theory. And yet, partition on religious 
basis had taken place. Did that make 
India a Hindu nation automatically? 
Even after large scale migration of 
Muslims to the newly created Pakistan, 
the 
Muslim 
population 
in 
India 
accounted for 12 per cent of the total 
population in 1951. So, how would the 
government of India treat its Muslim 
citizens and other religious minorities 
(Sikhs, Christians, Jains, Buddhists, 
Parsis and Jews)? The Partition had 
already created severe conflict between 
the two communities. 
There 
were 
competing 
political 
interests behind these conflicts.  The 
Muslim League was formed to protect 
the interests of the Muslims in colonial 
India. It was in the forefront of the 
demand for a separate Muslim nation. 
Similarly, there were organisations, 
which were trying to organise the 
Hindus in order to turn India into a 
Hindu nation. But most leaders of the 
national movement believed that India 
must treat persons of all religions 
Let’s watch a Film
GARAM HAWA 
Salim Mirza, a shoe manufacturer 
in Agra, increasingly finds himself 
a stranger amid the people he 
has lived with all his life.  He feels 
lost in the emerging reality after 
Partition. His business suffers 
and a refugee from the other side 
of partitioned India occupies his 
ancestral dwelling. His daughter 
too has a tragic end. He believes 
that things would soon be normal 
again. 
But many of his family members 
decide to move to Pakistan. Salim 
is torn between an impulse to 
move out to Pakistan and an urge 
to stay back. A decisive moment 
comes when Salim witnesses a 
students’ procession demanding 
fair treatment from the government. 
His son Sikandar has joined the 
procession. Can you imagine 
what Mirza Salim finally did? What 
do you think you would have done 
in these circumstances?
Year: 1973
Director: M.S. Sathyu
Screenplay: Kaifi Azmi
Actors: Balraj Sahani, Jalal Aga, 
Farouque Sheikh, Gita Siddharth
2018-19
12                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
Mahatma Gandhi’s sacriﬁ ce
On the 15th August 1947 Mahatma Gandhi did not participate in any 
of the Independence Day celebrations. He was in Kolkata in the areas 
which were torn by gruesome riots between Hindus and Muslims. 
He was saddened by the communal violence and disheartened that 
the principles of ahimsa (non-violence) and satyagraha (active but 
non-violent resistance) that he had lived and worked for, had failed 
to bind the people in troubled times. Gandhiji went on to persuade 
the Hindus and Muslims to give up violence. His presence in Kolkata 
greatly improved the situation, and the coming of independence was 
celebrated in a spirit of communal harmony, with joyous dancing in 
the streets. Gandhiji’s prayer meetings attracted large crowds. But this 
was short lived as riots between Hindus and Muslims erupted once 
again and Gandhiji had to resort to a fast to bring peace. 
Next month Gandhiji moved to Delhi where large scale violence had 
erupted. He was deeply concerned about ensuring that Muslims should 
be allowed to stay in India with dignity, as equal citizens. He was also 
concerned about the relations between India and Pakistan. He was 
unhappy with what he saw as the Indian government’s decision not 
to honour its financial commitments to Pakistan. With all this in mind 
he undertook what turned out to be his last fast in January 1948. As 
in Kolkata, his fast had a dramatic effect in Delhi. Communal tension 
and violence reduced. Muslims of Delhi and surrounding areas could 
safely return to their homes. The Government of India agreed to give 
Pakistan its dues. 
Gandhiji’s actions were however not liked by all. Extremists in both 
the communities blamed him for their conditions. He was particularly 
disliked by those who wanted Hindus to take revenge or who wanted 
India to become a country for the Hindus, just as Pakistan was for 
Muslims. They accused Gandhiji of acting in the interests of the Muslims 
and Pakistan. Gandhiji thought that these people were misguided. He 
was convinced that any attempt to make India into a country only for 
the Hindus would destroy India. His steadfast pursuit of Hindu-Muslim 
unity provoked Hindu extremists so much that they made several 
attempts to assassinate Gandhiji. Despite this he refused to accept 
armed protection and continued to meet everyone during his prayer 
meetings. Finally, on 30 January 1948, one such extremist, Nathuram 
Vinayak Godse, walked up to Gandhiji during his evening  prayer in 
Delhi and fired three bullets at him, killing him instantly. Thus ended a 
life long struggle for truth, non-violence, justice and tolerance. 
Gandhiji’s death had an almost magical effect on the communal 
situation in the country. Partition-related anger and violence suddenly 
subsided. The Government of India cracked down on organisations 
that were spreading communal hatred. Organisations like the Rashtriya 
Swayamsewak Sangh were banned for some time. Communal politics 
began to lose its appeal.
12                                                                    
2018-19
Challenge  o  Nation Building                                                                              13  
Credit: Sunil Janah
The news of Gandhi Ji’s assasination drew a crowd in Kolkata.
                                                                                                                            13  
2018-19
14                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
 Let’s re-search
equally and that India should not be a country that gave superior 
status to adherents of one faith and inferior to those who practiced 
another religion. All citizens would be equal irrespective of their 
religious affiliation.  Being religious or a believer would not be a test 
of citizenship. They cherished therefore the ideal of a secular nation. 
This ideal was enshrined in the Indian Constitution.
Shweta noticed that her Nana (maternal grandfather) would get very 
quiet whenever anyone mentioned Pakistan. One day she decided to 
ask him about it. Her Nana told her about how he moved from Lahore to 
Ludhiana during Partition. Both his parents were killed. Even he would 
not have survived, but a neighbouring Muslim family gave him shelter 
and kept him in hiding for several days. They helped him find some 
relatives and that is how he managed to cross the border and start a 
new life.
Have you heard a similar story? Ask your grandparents or anyone of 
that generation about their memories of Independence Day, about the 
celebration, about the trauma of Partition, about the expectations they 
had from independence.  
Write down at least two of these stories. 
Integration o  Princely State 
British India was divided into what were called the British Indian 
Provinces and the Princely States. The British Indian Provinces 
were directly under the control of the British government. On the 
other hand, several large and small states ruled by princes, called 
the Princely States, enjoyed some form of control over their internal 
affairs as long as they accepted British supremacy. This was called 
paramountcy or suzerainty of the British crown. Princely States 
covered one-third of the land area of the British Indian Empire and 
one out of four Indians lived under princely rule.  
The problem
Just before Independence it was announced by the British that with 
the end of their rule over India, paramountcy of the British crown 
over Princely States would also lapse. This meant that all these 
states, as many as 565 in all, would become legally independent. The 
British government took the view that all these states were free to join 
either India or Pakistan or remain independent if they so wished. This 
decision was left not to the people but to the princely rulers of these 
states.  This was a very serious problem and could threaten the very 
existence of a united India.
The problems started very soon. First of all, the ruler of Travancore 
announced that the state had decided on Independence. The Nizam of 
2018-19
Challenge  o  Nation Building                                                                              15  
Can’t we end the 
Partition of India 
and Pakistan the 
way they did in 
Germany? I want 
to have breakfast 
in Amritsar and 
lunch in Lahore!
Isn’t it better that 
we now learn to 
live and respect 
each other as 
independent 
nations? 
Note: This 
illustration is not 
a map drawn to 
scale and should 
not be taken to 
be an authentic 
depiction of 
India’s external 
boundaries. 
2018-19
16                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
Hyderabad made a similar announcement the next day. Rulers like 
the Nawab of Bhopal were averse to joining the Constituent Assembly. 
This response of the rulers of the Princely States meant that after 
Independence there was a very real possibility that India would get 
further divided into a number of small countries. The prospects of 
democracy for the people in these states also looked bleak. This was a 
strange situation, since the Indian Independence was aimed at unity, 
self-determination as well as democracy. In most of these princely 
states, governments were run in a non-democratic manner and the 
rulers were unwilling to give democratic rights to their populations. 
Government’s approach
The interim government took a firm stance against the possible 
division of India into small principalities of different sizes. The Muslim 
League opposed the Indian National Congress and took the view that 
the States should be free to adopt any course they liked. Sardar Patel 
was India’s Deputy Prime Minister and the Home Minister during 
the crucial period immediately following Independence. He played a 
historic role in negotiating with the rulers of princely states firmly but 
diplomatically and bringing most of them into the Indian Union. It 
may look easy now. But it was a very complicated task which required 
skilful persuasion. For instance, there were 26 small states in today’s 
Orissa.  Saurashtra region of Gujarat had 14 big states, 119 small 
states and numerous other different administrations.
The government’s approach was guided by three considerations. 
Firstly, the people of most of the princely states clearly wanted to 
become part of the Indian union. Secondly, the government was 
prepared to be flexible in giving autonomy to some regions. The idea 
was to accommodate plurality and adopt a flexible approach in dealing 
with the demands of the regions. Thirdly, in the backdrop of Partition 
which brought into focus the contest over demarcation of territory, 
the integration and consolidation of the territorial boundaries of the 
nation had assumed supreme importance.
Before 15 August 1947, peaceful negotiations had brought almost 
all states whose territories were contiguous to the new boundaries of 
India, into the Indian Union. The rulers of most of the states signed 
a document called the ‘Instrument of Accession’ which meant that 
their state agreed to become a part of the Union of India. Accession of 
the Princely States of Junagadh, Hyderabad, Kashmir and Manipur 
proved more difficult than the rest. The issue of Junagarh was 
resolved after a plebiscite confirmed people’s desire to join India.  You 
will read about Kashmir in Chapter Eight. Here, let us look at the 
cases of Hyderabad and Manipur.
 
We are at a momentous 
stage in the hiﬆ ory o  India. 
By common endeavour, we 
can raise the country to 
new greatne  , w ile lack 
o  unity will e pose us to 
une pec ed calamitie . I 
hope the Indian State  will 
realise fully that if we do 
no  cooperate and work 
toge her in the general 
intere t, anarchy and chaos 
will overwhelm us all, great 
and small, and lead us to 
to al ruin...
Sardar Patel
Letter to Princely rulers, 
1947. 
“
“
2018-19
Challenge  o  Nation Building                                                                              17  
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, the largest of the Princely States was 
surrounded entirely by Indian territory. Some parts of 
the old Hyderabad state are today parts of Maharashtra, 
Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh. Its ruler carried the title, 
‘Nizam’, and he was one of the world’s richest men. The 
Nizam wanted an independent status for Hyderabad. He 
entered into what was called the Standstill Agreement with 
India in November 1947 for a year while negotiations with 
the Indian government were going on. 
In the meantime, a movement of the people of 
Hyderabad State against the Nizam’s rule gathered force. 
The peasantry in the Telangana region in particular, was 
the victim of Nizam’s oppressive rule and rose against him. 
Women who had seen the worst of this oppression joined 
the movement in large numbers. Hyderabad town was the 
nerve centre of this movement. The Communists and the 
Hyderabad Congress were in the forefront of the movement. 
The Nizam responded by unleashing a para-military force 
known as the Razakars on the people. The atrocities and 
communal nature of the Razakars knew no bounds. They 
Sardar Patel with the Nizam of Hyderabad
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel 
(1875-1950): Leader of 
the freedom movement; 
Congress leader; follower of 
Mahatma Gandhi;  Deputy 
Prime Minister and first Home 
Minister of independent India; 
played an important role in 
the integration of Princely 
States with India; member 
of important committees of 
the Constituent Assembly 
on Fundamental Rights, 
Minorities, Provincial 
Constitution, etc.
Credit: PIB
2018-19
18                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
murdered, maimed, raped and looted, targeting particularly the non-
Muslims. The central government had to order the army to tackle the 
situation. In September 1948, Indian army moved in to control the 
Nizam’s forces. After a few days of intermittent fighting, the Nizam 
surrendered. This led to Hyderabad’s accession to India.
Manipur
A few days before Independence, the Maharaja of Manipur, 
Bodhachandra Singh, signed the Instrument of Accession with the 
Indian government on the assurance that the internal autonomy of 
Manipur would be maintained. Under the pressure of public opinion, 
the Maharaja held elections in Manipur in June 1948 and the state 
became a constitutional monarchy. Thus Manipur was the first part 
of India to hold an election based on universal adult franchise. 
In the Legislative Assembly of Manipur there were sharp 
differences over the question of merger of Manipur with India. While 
the state Congress wanted the merger, other political parties were 
opposed to this. The Government of India succeeded in pressurising 
the Maharaja into signing a Merger Agreement in September 1949, 
without consulting the popularly elected Legislative Assembly of 
Manipur. This caused a lot of anger and resentment in Manipur, the 
repercussions of which are still being felt. 
I wonder what 
happened to all 
those hundreds 
of kings, queens, 
princes and 
princesses. How 
did they live 
their lives after 
becoming just 
ordinary citizens?
Credit: R. K. Laxman in the Times of India
This cartoon 
comments on the 
relation between 
the people and 
the rulers in the 
Princely States, 
and also on 
Patel’s approach 
to resolving this 
issue.
2018-19
Challenge  o  Nation Building                                                                              19  
“
“
Reorganisation o  State 
The process of nation-building did not come to an end with Partition 
and integration of Princely States. Now the challenge was to draw the 
internal boundaries of the Indian states. This was not just a matter 
of administrative divisions.  The boundaries had to be drawn in a way 
so that the linguistic and cultural plurality of the country could be 
reflected without affecting the unity of the nation. 
During colonial rule, the state boundaries were drawn either on 
administrative convenience or simply coincided with the territories 
annexed by the British government or the territories ruled by the 
princely powers. 
Our national movement had rejected these divisions as artificial 
and had promised the linguistic principle as the basis of formation 
of states. In fact after the Nagpur session of Congress in 1920 the 
principle was recognised as the basis of the reorganisation of the 
Indian National Congress party itself.  Many Provincial Congress 
Committees were created by linguistic zones, which did not follow 
the administrative divisions of British India.  
Things changed after Independence and Partition. Our leaders 
felt that carving out states on the basis of language might lead to 
disruption and disintegration. It was also felt that this would draw 
attention away from other social and economic challenges that the 
country faced. The central leadership decided to postpone matters. 
The need for postponement was also felt because the fate of the 
Princely States had not been decided. Also, the memory of Partition 
was still fresh.
This decision of the national leadership was challenged by the local 
leaders and the people. Protests began in the Telugu speaking areas of 
the old Madras province, which included present day Tamil Nadu, parts 
of Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Karnataka. The Vishalandhra movement 
(as the movement for a separate Andhra was called) demanded that 
the Telugu speaking areas should be separated from the Madras 
province of which they were a part and be made into a separate Andhra 
province. Nearly all the political forces in the Andhra region were in 
favour of linguistic reorganisation of the then Madras province. 
The movement gathered momentum as a result of the Central 
government’s vacillation. Potti Sriramulu, a Congress leader and a 
veteran Gandhian, went on an indefinite fast that led to his death after 
56 days. This caused great unrest and resulted in violent outbursts in 
Andhra region. People in large numbers took to the streets. Many were 
injured or lost their lives in police firing.  In Madras, several legislators 
resigned their seats in protest. Finally, the Prime Minister announced 
the formation of a separate Andhra state in December 1952.
                  ..if lingusitic 
province  are formed, it 
will also give a ﬁ llip to 
the regional language . It 
would be absurd to make 
Hindustani the medium 
o  instruction in all the 
regions and it is still more 
absurd to use English for 
this purpose.
Mahatma Gandhi 
January1948
2018-19
20                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
Read the map and answer the following questions:
1. Name the original state from which the following states were carved out:
 
Gujarat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Haryana
 
Meghalaya 
 
 
 
 
 
Chhattisgarh
2. Name two states that were affected by the Partition of the country.
3. Name two states today that were once a Union Territory.
Note: This illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to be 
 
an authentic depiction of India’s external boundaries. 
2018-19
Challenge  o  Nation Building                                                                              21  
The formation of Andhra spurred the struggle for 
making of other states on linguistic lines in other parts 
of the country. These struggles forced the Central 
Government into appointing a States Reorganisation 
Commission in 1953 to look into the question of 
redrawing of the boundaries of states. The Commission 
in its report accepted that the boundaries of the state 
should reflect the boundaries of different languages.  On 
the basis of its report the States Reorganisation Act was 
passed in 1956.  This led to the creation of 14 states and 
six union territories.
Now, isn’t this very interesting? Nehru and other 
leaders were very popular, and yet the people did not 
hesitate to agitate for linguistic states against the 
wishes of the leaders! 
Potti Sriramulu 
(1901-1952):  Gandhian 
worker; left government 
job to participate in 
Salt Satyagraha; also 
participated in individual 
Satyagraha; went on a 
fast in 1946 demanding 
that temples in Madras 
province be opened to 
dalits; undertook a fast unto 
death from 19 October 1952 
demanding separate state 
of Andhra; died during the 
fast on 15 December 1952. 
Credit: Shankar
“Struggle for Survival” (26 July 1953) captures contemporary impression of the 
demand for linguistic states
2018-19
22                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
One of the most important concerns in the early years 
was that demands for separate states would endanger 
the unity of the country. It was felt that linguistic 
states may foster separatism and create pressures on 
the newly founded nation. But the leadership, under 
popular pressure, finally made a choice in favour of 
linguistic states. It was hoped that if we accept the 
regional and linguistic claims of all regions, the threat of 
division and separatism would be reduced. Besides, the 
accommodation of regional demands and the formation 
of linguistic states were also seen as more democratic. 
Now it is more than fifty years since the formation of 
linguistic states. We can say that linguistic states and 
the movements for the formation of these states changed 
the nature of democratic politics and leadership in some 
basic ways. The path to politics and power was now 
open to people other than the small English speaking 
elite. Linguistic reorganisation also gave some uniform 
basis to the drawing of state boundaries. It did not lead 
Credit: Shankar
“Coaxing the Genie back” (5 February 1956) asked if the State Reorganisation Commission could 
contain the genie of linguism.
2018-19
Challenge  o  Nation Building                                                                              23  
to disintegration of the country as many had feared earlier. On the 
contrary it strengthened national unity.  
Above all, the linguistic states underlined the acceptance of the 
principle of diversity. When we say that India adopted democracy, it 
does not simply mean that India embraced a democratic constitution, 
nor does it merely mean that India adopted the format of elections. The 
choice was larger than that. It was a choice in favour of recognising 
and accepting the existence of differences which could at times be 
oppositional.  Democracy, in other words, was associated with plurality 
of ideas and ways of life.  Much of the politics in the later period was 
to take place within this framework. 
Fast Forward   Creation of new states
The acceptance of the principle of linguistic states did not mean, however, that all states 
immediately became linguistic states. There was an experiment of ‘bilingual’ Bombay state, 
consisting of Gujarati- and Marathi-speaking people. After a popular agitation, the states of 
Maharashtra and Gujarat were created in 1960. 
In Punjab also, there were two linguistic groups: Hindi-speaking and Punjabi-speaking. The 
Punjabi-speaking people demanded a separate state. But it was not granted with other states 
in 1956. Statehood for Punjab came ten years later, in 1966, when the territories of today’s 
Haryana and Himachal Pradesh were separated from the larger Punjab state.  
Another major reorganisation of states took place in the north-east in 1972. Meghalaya was 
carved out of Assam in 1972.  Manipur and Tripura too emerged as separate states in the same 
year. The states of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh came into being in 1987. Nagaland had 
become a state much earlier in 1963. 
Language did not, however, remain the sole basis of organisation of states. In later years 
sub-regions raised demands for separate states on the basis of a separate regional culture or 
complaints of regional imbalance in development. Three such states, Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand 
and Jharkhand, were created in 2000. The story of reorganisation has not come to an end. 
There are many regions in the country where there are movements demanding separate and 
smaller states. These include Vidarbha in Maharashtra, Harit Pradesh in the western region of 
Uttar Pradesh and the northern region of West Bengal.
The US has one-fourth 
of our population but 50 
states. Why can’t India 
have more than 100 
states? 
2018-19
24                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
1.  
Which among the following statements about the Partition is incorrect?
 
(a)  
Partition of India was the outcome of the “two-nation theory.”
 
(b)  
Punjab and Bengal were the two provinces divided on the basis  
 
 
of religion.
 
(c)  
East Pakistan and West Pakistan were not contiguous.
 
(d)  
The scheme of Partition included a plan for transfer of  
 
 
 
 
population across the border.
2.  
Match the principles with the instances:
 
(a)  
Mapping of boundaries  
 
 
 
i.  Pakistan and   
 
 
 
on religious grounds 
 
 
 
 
 
Bangladesh 
 
 
 
(b)  
Mapping of boundaries on grounds 
ii. India and   
 
 
 
 
of different languages  
 
 
 
 
Pakistan 
 
 
 
(c)  
Demarcating boundaries within a   
iii. Jharkhand and  
 
 
 
country by geographical zones  
 
 
Chhattisgarh
 
(d)  
Demarcating boundaries within a   
iv. Himachal Pradesh   
 
 
country on administrative and   
 
 
and Uttarakhand
 
 
 
political grounds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  
Take a current political map of India (showing outlines of states) and 
mark the location of  the following Princely States.
 
(a) 
 
Junagadh   
 
 
 
 
 
(b)  Manipur 
 
 
 
(c)  
 
Mysore  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(d)  Gwalior  
4.  
Here are two opinions –
 
Bismay: “The merger with the Indian State was an extension of 
democracy to the people of the Princely States.”
 
Inderpreet: “I am not so sure, there was force being used. Democracy 
comes by creating consensus.”
 
What is your own opinion in the light of accession of Princely States and 
the responses of the people in these parts?
5.  
Read the following very different statements made in August 1947 –
 
“Today you have worn on your heads a crown of thorns. The seat of 
power is a nasty thing. You have to remain ever wakeful on that seat….
you have to be more humble and forbearing…now there will be no end 
to your being tested.”  — M.K GANDHI
 
“…India will awake to a life of freedom….we step out from the old to the 
new…we end today a period of ill fortune and India discovers herself 
again. The achievement we celebrate today is but a step, an opening of 
opportunity…”  — JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
 
Spell out the agenda of nation building that flows from these two 
statements. Which one appeals more to you and why?
EXERCISES
24                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
2018-19
Challenge  o  Nation Building                                                                              25  
  6.  What are the reasons being used by Nehru for keeping India secular? 
Do you think these reasons were only ethical and sentimental? Or were 
there some prudential reasons as well? 
  7.  Bring out two major differences between the challenge of nation 
building for eastern and western regions of the country at the time of 
Independence. 
  8.  What was the task of the States Reorganisation Commission? What 
was its most salient recommendation?
  9.  It is said that the nation is to a large extent an “ imagined community” 
held together by common beliefs, history, political aspirations and 
imaginations. Identify the features that make India a nation.
10.  Read the following passage and answer the questions below:
 
“In the history of nation-building only the Soviet experiment bears 
comparison with the Indian. There too, a sense of unity had to be forged 
between many diverse ethnic groups, religious, linguistic communities 
and social classes. The scale – geographic as well as demographic 
– was comparably massive. The raw material the state had to work with 
was equally unpropitious: a people divided by faith and driven by debt 
and disease.”  — RAMACHANDRA GUHA
 
(a) 
List the commonalities that the author mentions between India  
 
 
and Soviet Union and give one example for each of these from  
 
 
India.
 
(b) 
The author does not talk about dissimilarities between the two  
 
 
experiments. Can you mention two dissimilarities?
 
(c) 
In retrospect which of these two experiments worked better and  
 
 
why?
LET US DO IT TOGETHER
•  
Read a novel/ story on Partition by an Indian and a Pakistani/
Bangladeshi writer. What are the commonalities of the experience 
across the border?
•  
Collect all the stories from the ‘Let’s Research’ suggestion in 
this chapter. Prepare a wallpaper that highlights the common 
experiences and has stories on the unique experiences.
Challenge  o  Nation Building                                                                              25  
2018-19
Credit: Shankar
In this chapter…
The challenge of nation-building, covered in the last chapter, was 
accompanied by the challenge of instituting democratic politics. Thus, 
electoral competition among political parties began immediately after 
Independence. In this chapter, we look at the first decade of electoral 
politics in order to understand
• 
the establishment of a system of free and fair elections; 
• 
the domination of the Congress party in the years immediately  
 
 
after Independence; and 
• 
the emergence of opposition parties and their policies.
This famous sketch 
by Shankar appeared 
on the cover of his 
collection – Don’t Spare 
Me, Shankar. The 
original sketch was 
drawn in the context of 
India’s China policy. But 
this cartoon captures 
the dual role of the 
Congress during the era 
of one-party dominance.
2018-19
2
chapter
era of one-party 
dominance
Challenge o  building democracy
You now have an idea of the difficult circumstances in which 
independent India was born. You have read about the serious 
challenge of nation-building that confronted the country right in the 
beginning. Faced with such serious challenges, leaders in many other 
countries of the world decided that their country could not afford 
to have democracy. They said that national unity was their first 
priority and that democracy will introduce differences and conflicts. 
Therefore many of the countries that gained freedom from colonialism 
experienced non-democratic rule. It took various forms: nominal 
democracy but effective control by one leader, one party rule or direct 
army rule. Non-democratic regimes always started with a promise of 
restoring democracy very soon. But once they established themselves, 
it was very difficult to dislodge them.
The conditions in India were not very different. But the leaders of 
the newly independent India decided to take the more difficult path. 
Any other path would have been surprising, for our freedom struggle 
was deeply committed to the idea of democracy. Our leaders were 
conscious of the critical role of politics in any democracy. They did not 
see politics as a problem; they saw it as a way of solving the problems. 
Every society needs to decide how it will govern and regulate itself. 
There are always different policy alternatives to choose from. There 
are different groups with different and conflicting aspirations. How 
do we resolve these differences? Democratic politics is an answer to 
this question. While competition and power are the two most visible 
things about politics, the purpose of political activity is and should be 
deciding and pursuing public interest. This is the route our leaders 
decided to take.
Last year you studied how our Constitution was drafted. 
You would remember that the Constitution was adopted on 
26 November 1949 and signed on 24 January 1950 and it came into 
effect on 26 January 1950. At that time the country was being ruled 
by an interim government. It was now necessary to install the first 
democratically elected government of the country. The Constitution 
had laid down the rules, now the machine had to be put in place. 
Initially it was thought that this was only a matter of a few months. The 
Election Commission of India was set up in January 1950. Sukumar 
Sen became the first Chief Election Commissioner. The country’s first 
general elections were expected sometime in 1950 itself. 
What’s so special 
about our being a 
democracy? Sooner 
or later every country 
has become a 
democracy, isn’t it?
                In India,…. 
…hero-worship, plays a part 
in its politics unequalled 
in magnitude by the part 
it plays in the politics o  
any o her country….But in 
politics, .. ..hero-worship is a 
sure road to degradation and 
eventual dic atorship.
Babasaheb Dr. B.R. 
Ambedkar
Speech in Constituent 
Assembly 
25 November 1949
“
“
2018-19
28                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
A cartoonist’s impression of the election committee formed by the Congress to choose party 
candidates in 1951. On the committee, besides Nehru: Morarji Desai, Rafi  Ahmed Kidwai, 
Dr B.C. Roy, Kamaraj Nadar, Rajagopalachari, Jagjivan Ram, Maulana Azad, D.P. Mishra, 
P.D. Tandon and Govind Ballabh Pant.
But the Election Commission discovered that it was not going to 
be easy to hold a free and fair election in a country of India’s size. 
Holding an election required delimitation or drawing the boundaries 
of the electoral constituencies. It also required preparing the electoral 
rolls, or the list of all the citizens eligible to vote. Both these tasks took 
a lot of time. When the first draft of the rolls was published, it was 
discovered that the names of nearly 40 lakh women were not recorded 
in the list. They were simply listed as “wife of …” or “daughter of …”. 
The Election Commission refused to accept these entries and ordered 
a revision if possible and deletion if necessary. Preparing for the first 
general election  was a mammoth exercise.  No election  on this scale 
had ever been conducted  in the world before. At that time there 
were 17 crore eligible voters, who had to elect about 3,200 MLAs and 
489 Members of Lok Sabha. Only 15 per cent of these eligible voters 
were literate. Therefore the Election Commission had to think of some 
special method of voting. The Election Commission trained over 3 
lakh officers and polling staff to conduct the elections. 
It was not just the size of the country and the electorate that made 
this election unusual. The first general election was also the first big 
test of democracy in  a poor and illiterate country. Till then democracy 
had existed only in the prosperous countries, mainly in Europe and 
North America, where nearly everyone was literate. By that time 
many countries in Europe had not given voting rights to all women. 
In this context India’s experiment with universal adult franchise 
That was a good 
decision. But what 
about men who still 
refer to a woman as 
Mrs. Somebody, as if 
she does not have a 
name of her own?
Credit: Shankar, 20 May 1951
2018-19
Era o  One-party Dominance                                                                                29  
 Let’s re-search
Ask the elders in your family and neighbourhood about their 
experience of participating in elections.
• 
Did anyone vote in the first or second general election? Who did  
 
they vote for and why?
• 
Is there someone who has used all the three methods of voting?  
 
Which one did they prefer? 
• 
In which ways do they find the elections of those days different  
 
from the present ones?
Changing methods of voting 
These days we use an Electronic Voting Machine (EVM) to record voters’ 
preferences. But that is not how we started. In the first general election, it 
was decided to place inside each polling booth a box for each candidate with 
the election symbol of that candidate. Each voter was given a blank ballot 
paper which they had to drop into the box of the candidate they wanted to 
vote for. About 20 lakh steel boxes were used for this purpose. 
A presiding officer from Punjab described how he 
A sample of the 
ballot paper 
used from 
the third to 
the thirteenth 
general 
elections to Lok 
Sabha
prepared the ballot boxes—“Each box had to have 
its candidate’s symbol, both inside and outside it, and 
outside on either side, had to be displayed the name 
of the candidate in Urdu, Hindi and Punjabi along with 
the number of the constituency, the polling station and 
the polling booth. The paper seal with the numerical 
description of the candidate, signed by the presiding 
officer, had to be inserted in the token frame and its 
window closed by its door which had to be fixed in its place 
at the other end by means of a wire. All this had to be 
done on the day previous to the one fixed for polling. To fix 
symbols and labels the boxes had first to be rubbed with 
sandpaper or a piece of brick. I found that it took about 
five hours for six persons, including my two daughters, to 
complete this work. All this was done at my house.”
Electronic Voting 
Machine
After the first two elections this method was changed. Now the ballot paper 
carried the names and symbols of all the candidates and the voter was required 
to put a stamp on the name of the candidate they wanted to vote for. This method 
worked for nearly forty years. Towards the end of 1990s the Election Commission 
started using the EVM. By 2004 the entire country had shifted to the EVM.
2018-19
30                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
appeared very bold and risky. An Indian editor called it “the 
biggest gamble in history”.  Organiser, a magazine, wrote 
that Jawaharlal Nehru “would live to confess the failure 
of universal adult franchise in India”. A British member of 
the Indian Civil Service claimed that “a future and more 
enlightened age will view with astonishment the absurd farce 
of recording the votes of millions of illiterate people”. 
The elections had to be postponed twice and finally held 
from October 1951 to February 1952. But this election is 
referred to as the 1952 election since most parts of the 
country voted in January 1952. It took six months for 
the campaigning, polling and counting to be completed. 
Elections were competitive – there were on an average more 
than four candidates for each seat. The level of participation 
was encouraging — more than half the eligible voters turned 
out to vote on the day of elections. When the results were 
declared these were accepted as fair even by the losers. 
The Indian experiment had proved the critics wrong. The 
Times of India held that the polls have “confounded all those 
sceptics who thought the introduction of adult franchise 
too risky an experiment in this country”. The Hindustan 
Times claimed that “there is universal agreement that the 
Indian people have conducted themselves admirably in the 
largest experiment in democratic elections in the history of 
the world”. Observers outside India were equally impressed. 
India’s general election of 1952 became a landmark in the 
history of democracy all over the world. It was no longer 
possible to argue that democratic elections could not be held 
in conditions of poverty or lack of education. It proved that 
democracy could be practiced anywhere in the world. 
Maulana Abul Kalam 
Azad (1888-1958): 
original name — Abul 
Kalam Mohiyuddin 
Ahmed; scholar of 
Islam; freedom fighter 
and Congress leader; 
proponent of Hindu-
Muslim unity; opposed 
to Partition; member of 
Constituent Assembly; 
Education Minister in 
the first cabinet of  free 
India.
Congre   dominance in the ﬁ rst  three  
general elec ions
The results of the first general election did not surprise anyone. The 
Indian National Congress was expected to win this election. The 
Congress party, as it was popularly known, had inherited the legacy 
of the national movement. It was the only party then to have an 
organisation spread all over the country. And finally, in Jawaharlal 
Nehru, the party had the most popular and charismatic leader in 
Indian politics. He led the Congress campaign and toured through 
the country. When the final results were declared, the extent of the 
victory of the Congress did surprise many. The party won 364 of the 
489 seats in the first Lok Sabha and finished way ahead of any other 
challenger. The Communist Party of India that came next in terms of 
seats won only 16 seats. The state elections were held with the Lok 
2018-19
Era o  One-party Dominance                                                                                31  
 
Can you identify the places where the Congress had a strong presence?
In which States, did the other parties perform reasonably well?
Note: This illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to be 
 
an authentic depiction of India’s external boundaries. 
2018-19
32                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
Sabha elections. The Congress scored big victory 
in those elections as well. It won a majority of 
seats in all the states except Travancore-Cochin 
(part of today’s Kerala), Madras and Orissa. 
Finally even in these states the Congress formed 
the government. So the party ruled all over the 
country at the national and the state level. As 
expected, Jawaharlal Nehru became the Prime 
Minister after the first general election. 
A look at the electoral map on the previous 
page would give you a sense of the dominance 
of the Congress during the period 1952-1962. 
In the second and the third general elections, 
held in 1957 and 1962 respectively,  the 
Congress maintained the same position in 
the Lok Sabha by winning three-fourth of 
the seats. None of the opposition parties 
could win even one-tenth of the number 
of seats won by the Congress. In the state 
assembly elections, the Congress did not 
get majority in a few cases. The most 
significant of these cases was in Kerala in 1957 
when a coalition led by the CPI formed the government. Apart 
from exceptions like this, the Congress controlled the national 
and all the state governments.
The extent of the victory of the Congress was artificially 
boosted by our electoral system. The Congress won three out of 
every four seats but it did not get even half of the votes. In 1952, 
for example, the Congress obtained 45 per cent of the total votes. 
But it managed to win 74 per cent of the seats. The Socialist 
Party, the second largest party in terms of votes, secured more 
than 10 per cent of the votes all over the country. But it could 
not even win three per cent of the seats. How did this happen? 
For this, you need to recall the discussion about the first-past-
the-post method in your textbook, Indian Constitution at Work
last year.
  In this system of election, that has been adopted in our 
country, the party that gets more votes than others tends to get 
much more than its proportional share. That is exactly what 
worked in favour of the Congress. If we add up the votes of all 
the non-Congress candidates it was more than the votes of the 
Congress. But the non-Congress votes were divided between 
different rival parties and candidates. So the Congress was still 
way ahead of the opposition and managed to win. 
Rajkumari Amrit Kaur 
(1889-1964): A Gandhian 
and  Freedom fighter; 
belonged to the royal 
family of Kapurthala; 
inherited Christian 
religion from her mother; 
member of Constituent 
Assembly; Minister for  
Health in independent 
India’s first ministry; 
continued as Health 
Minister till 1957. 
Credit: The Hindu
2018-19
Era o  One-party Dominance                                                                                33  
Communiﬆ  vic ory in Kerala
As early as in 1957, the Congress party had the bitter taste of defeat in Kerala. 
In the assembly elections held in March 1957, the Communist Party won the 
largest number of seats in the Kerala legislature. The party won 60 of the 
126 seats and had the support of five independents. The governor invited  
E. M. S. Namboodiripad, the leader of the Communist legislature party, to form 
the ministry.  For the first time in the world, a Communist party government 
had come to power through democratic elections. 
On losing power in the State, the Congress party began a ‘liberation struggle’ 
against the elected government. The CPI had come to power on the promise of 
carrying out radical and progressive policy measures. The Communists claimed 
that the agitation was led by vested interests and religious organisations. 
In 1959 the Congress government at 
the Centre dismissed the Communist 
government in Kerala under Article 356 
of the Constitution. This decision proved 
very controversial and was widely cited 
as the first instance of the misuse of 
constitutional emergency powers.    
E.M.S. Namboodiripad, leading a procession of 
Communist Party workers, after his ministry was 
dismissed from office in Trivandrum in August 
1959. 
Credit: Hindu
                                                                                                                            33  
2018-19
34                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
The origins of the Socialist Party can be traced 
back to the mass movement stage of the Indian 
National Congress in the pre-independence era. 
The Congress Socialist Party (CSP) was formed 
within the Congress in 1934 by a group of young 
leaders who wanted a more radical and egalitarian 
Congress. In 1948, the Congress amended its 
constitution to prevent its members from having a 
dual party membership. This forced the Socialists 
to form a separate Socialist Party in 1948. The 
Party’s electoral performance caused much 
disappointment to its supporters. Although the 
Party had presence in most of the states of India, 
it could achieve electoral success only in a few 
pockets.
The socialists believed in 
the ideology of democratic 
socialism which distinguished 
them both from the Congress 
as 
well 
as 
from 
the 
Communists. They criticised 
the Congress for favouring 
capitalists and landlords and 
for ignoring the workers and 
the peasants. But the socialists faced a dilemma when 
in 1955 the Congress declared its goal to be the socialist 
pattern of society. Thus it became difficult for the socialists 
to present themselves as an effective alternative to the 
Congress. Some of them, led by Rammanohar Lohia, 
increased their distance from and criticism of the Congress 
party. Some others like Asoka Mehta advocated a limited 
cooperation with the Congress.
The Socialist Party went through many splits and reunions 
leading to the formation of many socialist parties. These 
included the Kisan Mazdoor Praja Party, the Praja Socialist 
Party and Samyukta Socialist Party. Jayaprakash Narayan, 
Achyut Patwardhan, Asoka Mehta, Acharya Narendra Dev, 
Rammanohar Lohia and S.M. Joshi were among the leaders 
of the socialist parties. Many parties in contemporary India, 
like the Samajwadi Party, the Rashtriya Janata Dal, Janata 
Dal (United) and the Janata Dal (Secular) trace their origins 
to the Socialist Party.
Socialiﬆ  Party
Acharya Narendra 
Dev (1889-1956): 
Freedom fighter and 
founding President of 
the Congress Socialist 
Party; jailed several 
times during the 
freedom movement; 
active in peasants’ 
movement; a scholar 
of Buddhism; after 
independence led the 
Socialist Party and 
later the Praja Socialist 
Party. 
34                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
2018-19
Era o  One-party Dominance                                                                                35  
Nature o  Congre   dominance
India is not the only country to have experienced 
the dominance of one party. If we look around the 
world, we find many other examples of one-party 
dominance. But there is a crucial difference between 
these and the Indian experience. In the rest of the 
cases the dominance of one party was ensured by 
compromising democracy. In some countries like 
China, Cuba and Syria the constitution permits 
only a single party to rule the country. Some others 
like Myanmar, Belarus, Egypt, and Eritrea are 
effectively one-party states due to legal and military 
measures. Until a few years ago, Mexico, South Korea 
and Taiwan were also effectively one-party dominant states. What 
distinguished the dominance of the Congress party in India from 
all these cases was it happened under democratic conditions. Many 
parties contested elections in conditions of free and fair elections and 
yet the Congress managed to win election after election. This was 
similar to the dominance the African National Congress has enjoyed 
in South Africa after the end of apartheid.  
Founded 
in 
1929, 
as 
National 
Revolutionary Party and later renamed 
as the Institutional Revolutionary 
Party, the PRI (in Spanish), exercised 
power in Mexico for almost six 
decades. It represented the legacy 
of the Mexican revolution. Originally 
PRI was a mixture of various interests 
including political and military leaders, labour and peasant 
organisations and numerous political parties. Over a period 
of time, Plutarco Elías Calles, the founder of PRI, was able 
to capture the organisation and thereby the government. 
Elections were held at regular intervals and it was the 
PRI which won every time. Other parties existed in name 
only so as to give the ruling party greater legitimacy. The 
electoral laws were operated in a manner so as to ensure 
that the PRI always won. Elections were often rigged and 
manipulated by the ruling party. Its rule was described 
as ‘the perfect dictatorship’. Finally the party lost in the 
Presidential elections held in 2000. Mexico is no longer 
a one-party dominated country. But the tactics adopted 
by the PRI during the period of its dominance had a long-
term effect on the health of democracy. The citizens have 
yet to develop full confidence in the free and fair nature 
of elections. 
Babasaheb Bhimrao Ramji 
Ambedkar (1891-1956): Leader of 
the anti-caste movement and the 
struggle for justice to the Dalits; 
scholar and intellectual; founder 
of Independent Labour Party; later 
founded the Scheduled Castes 
Federation; planned the formation 
of the Republican Party of India; 
Member of Viceroy’s Executive 
Council during the Second 
World War;  Chairman, Drafting 
Committee of the Constituent 
Assembly; Minister in Nehru’s 
first cabinet after Independence; 
resigned in 1951 due to differences 
over the Hindu Code Bill; adopted 
Buddhism in 1956, with thousands 
of followers.
2018-19
36                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
Earlier we had 
coalition in a 
party, now we 
have coalition of 
parties. Does it 
mean that we have 
had a coalition 
government since 
1952? 
The roots of this extraordinary success of the Congress 
party go back to the legacy of the freedom struggle. 
Congress was seen as inheritor of the national movement. 
Many leaders who were in the forefront of that struggle 
were now contesting elections as Congress candidates. The 
Congress was already a very well-organised party and by 
the time the other parties could even think of a strategy, 
the Congress had already started its campaign. In fact, 
many parties were formed only around Independence or 
after that. Thus, the Congress had the ‘first off the blocks’ 
advantage.  By the time of Independence the party had not 
only spread across the length and breadth of the country 
as we had seen in the maps but also had an organisational 
network down to the local level. Most importantly, as the 
Congress was till recently a national movement, its nature 
was all-inclusive. All these factors contributed to the 
dominance of the Congress party.
Congress as social and ideological coalition
You have already studied the history of how Congress 
evolved from its origins in 1885 as a pressure group for 
the newly educated, professional and commercial classes 
to a mass movement in the twentieth century. This laid the 
basis for its eventual transformation into a mass political 
party and its subsequent domination of the political system. Thus 
the Congress began as a party dominated by the English speaking, 
upper caste, upper middle-class and urban elite. But with every civil 
disobedience movement it launched, its social base widened. It brought 
together diverse groups, whose interests were often contradictory. 
Peasants and industrialists, urban dwellers and villagers, workers 
and owners, middle, lower and upper classes and castes, all found 
space in the Congress. Gradually, its leadership also expanded 
beyond the upper caste and upper class professionals to agriculture 
based leaders with a rural orientation. By the time of Independence, 
the Congress was transformed into a rainbow-like social coalition 
broadly representing India’s diversity in terms of classes and castes, 
religions and languages and various interests. 
Many of these groups merged their identity within the Congress. 
Very often they did not and continued to exist within the Congress 
as groups and individuals holding different beliefs. In this sense the 
Congress was an ideological coalition as well. It accommodated the 
revolutionary and pacifist, conservative and radical, extremist and 
moderate and the right, left and all shades of the centre. The Congress 
was a ‘platform’ for numerous groups, interests and even political 
parties to take part in the national movement. In pre-Independence 
days, many organisations and parties with their own constitution and 
organisational structure were allowed to exist within the Congress. 
Rafi Ahmed Kidwai 
(1894-1954): 
Congress leader from 
U.P.; Minister in  U.P. 
in 1937 and again 
in 1946; Minister for 
Communications in 
the first ministry of 
free India; Food and 
Agriculture Minister, 
1952-54. 
2018-19
Era o  One-party Dominance                                                                                37  
In the early 1920s communist groups emerged 
in different parts of India taking inspiration 
from the Bolshevik revolution in Russia 
and advocating socialism as the solution to 
problems affecting the country. From 1935, 
the Communists worked mainly from within 
the fold of the Indian National Congress. 
A parting of ways took place in December 
1941, when the Communists decided to 
support the British in their war against Nazi 
Germany. Unlike other non-Congress parties 
the CPI had a well-oiled party machinery and 
dedicated cadre at the time of Independence. 
However, Independence raised different 
voices in the party. The basic question that 
troubled the party was the nature of Indian 
independence. Was India 
really free or was freedom 
a sham?  
Soon after Independence, 
the party thought that 
the transfer of power 
in 1947 was not  true 
independence and encouraged violent uprisings 
in Telangana. The Communists failed to generate 
popular support for their position and were crushed 
by the armed forces.  This forced them to rethink their 
position. In 1951 the Communist Party abandoned the 
path of violent revolution and decided to participate 
in the approaching general elections. In the first 
general election, CPI won 16 seats and emerged as 
the largest opposition party. The party’s support was 
more concentrated in Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal, 
Bihar and Kerala.
A. K. Gopalan, S.A. Dange, E.M.S. Namboodiripad, 
P.C. Joshi, Ajay Ghosh and P. Sundarraya were 
among the notable leaders of the CPI. The Party went 
through a major split in 1964 following  the ideological 
rift between Soviet Union and China. The pro-Soviet 
faction remained as the CPI, while the opponents 
formed the CPI(M). Both these parties continue to 
exist to this day.
The Communiﬆ  Party o  India
A.K. Gopalan            
(1904-1977): Communist 
leader from Kerala, 
worked as a Congress 
worker initially; joined 
the Communist Party in 
1939; after the split in 
the Communist Party 
in 1964, joined the 
CPI (M) and worked 
for strengthening the 
party; respected as a 
parliamentarian; Member 
of Parliament from 1952.
Era o  One-party Dominance                                                                                37  
2018-19
38                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
Some of these, like the Congress 
Socialist Party, later separated from 
the Congress and became opposition 
parties. Despite differences regarding 
the methods, specific programmes and 
policies the party managed to contain 
if not resolve differences and build a 
consensus. 
Tolerance and management  
of factions
This coalition-like character of the 
Congress gave it an unusual strength. 
Firstly, a coalition accommodates all 
those who join it. Therefore, it has 
to avoid any extreme position and 
strike a balance on almost all issues. 
Compromise and inclusiveness are the 
hallmarks of a coalition. This strategy 
put the opposition in a difficulty. 
Anything that the opposition wanted 
to say, would also find a place in 
the programme and ideology of the 
Congress.  Secondly, in a party that 
has the nature of a coalition, there is a 
greater tolerance of internal differences 
and ambitions of various groups 
and leaders are accommodated. The 
Congress did both these things during 
the freedom struggle and continued 
doing this even after Independence. 
That is why, even if a group was not 
happy with the position of the party 
or with its share of power, it would 
remain inside the party and fight the 
other groups rather than leaving the 
party and becoming an ‘opposition’. 
These groups inside the party are 
called factions. The coalitional nature 
of the Congress party tolerated and 
in fact encouraged various factions. 
Some of these factions were based 
on 
ideological 
considerations 
but 
very often these factions were rooted 
in personal ambitions and rivalries. 
Instead of being a weakness, internal 
factionalism became a strength of 
Let’s watch a Film
SIMHASAN
This Marathi film, based on Arun 
Sadhu’s two novels ‘Simhasan’ 
and ‘Mumbai Dinank’, depicts 
the tussle for the post of Chief 
Minister in Maharashtra. The story 
is told through journalist Digu 
Tipnis  as the silent ‘Sutradhar’. It 
tries to capture the intense power 
struggle within the ruling party 
and the secondary role of the 
Opposition.
Finance 
Minister, 
Vishwasrao 
Dabhade is making all-out efforts 
to unseat the incumbent Chief 
Minister. Both contenders are 
trying to woo trade union leader 
D’Casta  to obtain his support. In 
this factional fight, other politicians 
too seek to obtain maximum 
advantage while bargaining with 
both sides. Smuggling in Mumbai 
and the grim social reality in rural 
Maharashtra form the sub-plots in 
this film. 
Year: 1981
Director: Jabbar Patel
Screenplay: Vijay Tendulkar
Cast: Nilu Phule, Arun Sarnaik,
Dr.Shreeram Lagoo, Satish 
Dubashi, Datta Bhat, Madhukar 
Toradmal, Madhav Watve, Mohan 
Agashe
2018-19
Era o  One-party Dominance                                                                                39  
The Bharatiya Jana Sangh was 
formed in 1951 with Shyama Prasad 
Mukherjee as its founder-President. Its 
lineage however can be traced back 
to the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh 
(RSS) and the Hindu Mahasabha 
before Independence.
The Jana Sangh was different from 
other parties in terms of ideology and 
programmes. It emphasised the idea 
of one country, one culture and one 
nation and believed that the country 
could become modern, progressive 
and strong on the basis of Indian 
culture and traditions. The 
party called for a reunion 
of India and Pakistan in 
Akhand Bharat. The party 
was in forefront of the 
agitation to replace English 
with Hindi as the official 
language 
of 
India 
and 
was also opposed to the 
granting of concessions 
to religious and cultural 
minorities.  The party was 
a consistent advocate of India developing nuclear 
weapons especially after China carried out its atomic 
tests in 1964.
In the 1950s Jana Sangh remained on the margins 
of the electoral politics and was able to secure only 3 
Lok Sabha seats in 1952 elections and 4 seats in 1957 
general elections to Lok Sabha. In the early years its 
support came mainly from the urban areas in the Hindi 
speaking states like Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Delhi 
and Uttar Pradesh. The party’s leaders included Shyama 
Prasad Mukherjee, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya and Balraj 
Madhok. The Bharatiya Janata Party traces its roots to 
the Bharatiya Jana Sangh.
Bharatiya Jana Sangh
Deen Dayal 
Upadhyaya 
(1916-1968): Full-
time RSS worker 
since 1942; founder 
member of the 
Bharatiya Jana 
Sangh; General 
Secretary and 
later President of 
Bharatiya Jana 
Sangh; initiated the 
concept of integral 
humanism.
Era o  One-party Dominance                                                                                39  
2018-19
40                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
the Congress. Since there was room within the party for various 
factions to fight with each other, it meant that leaders representing 
different interests and ideologies remained within the Congress 
rather than go out and form a new party.  
Most of the state units of the Congress were made up of 
numerous factions. The factions took different ideological positions 
making the Congress appear as a grand centrist party. The other 
parties primarily attempted to influence these factions and thereby 
indirectly influenced policy and decision making from the “margins”. 
They were far removed from the actual exercise of authority. They 
were not alternatives to the ruling party; instead they constantly 
pressurised and criticised, censured and influenced the Congress. 
The system of factions functioned as balancing mechanism within 
the ruling party. Political competition therefore took place within the 
Congress. In that sense, in the first decade of electoral competition 
the Congress acted both as the ruling party as well as the opposition. 
That is why this period of Indian politics has been described as the 
‘Congress system’.
Emergence o  op osition partie 
I thought factions 
were a disease that 
needed to be cured. 
You make it sound 
as if factions are 
normal and good. 
As we have noted above, it is not that India did 
not have opposition parties during this period. 
While discussing the results of the elections, 
we have already come across the names of 
many parties other than the Congress. Even 
then India had a larger number of diverse 
and vibrant opposition parties than many 
other multi-party democracies. Some of 
these had come into being even before the first 
general election of 1952. Some of these parties 
played an important part in the politics of the 
country in the ’sixties and ’seventies. The 
roots of almost all the non-Congress parties of 
today can be traced to one or the other of the 
opposition parties of the 1950s.
All these opposition parties succeeded in 
gaining only a token representation in the 
Lok Sabha and state assemblies during this 
period. Yet their presence played a crucial role 
in maintaining the democratic character of the 
system. These parties offered a sustained and 
often principled criticism of the policies and 
practices of the Congress party. This kept the 
ruling party under check and often changed 
the balance of power within the Congress. By 
keeping democratic political alternative alive, 
“Tug of War” (29 August 1954) is a cartoonist’s 
impression of the relative strength of the opposition 
and the government. Sitting on the tree are Nehru 
and his cabinet colleagues. Trying to topple the 
tree are opposition leaders A. K. Gopalan, Acharya 
Kripalani, N.C. Chatterjee, Srikantan Nair and 
Sardar Hukum Singh.
Credit: Shankar
2018-19
Era o  One-party Dominance                                                                                41  
Swatantra Party was formed in August 
1959 after the Nagpur resolution of the 
Congress which called for land ceilings, 
take-over of food grain trade by the state 
and adoption of cooperative farming. The 
party was led by old Congressmen like C. 
Rajagopalachari, K.M.Munshi, N.G.Ranga 
and Minoo Masani. The party stood out 
from the others in terms of its position on 
economic issues. 
The 
Swatantra 
Party 
wanted 
the 
government to be less and less involved 
in controlling the economy. It believed 
that prosperity could come only through 
individual 
freedom. 
It was critical of the 
development strategy 
of state intervention 
in 
the 
economy, 
centralised 
planning, 
nationalisation and the 
public sector. It instead 
favoured expansion of a 
free private sector. The Swatantra Party was against 
land ceilings in agriculture, and opposed cooperative 
farming and state trading. It was also opposed to the 
progressive tax regime and demanded dismantling 
of the licensing regime. It was critical of the policy of 
non-alignment and maintaining friendly relations with 
the Soviet Union and advocated closer ties with the 
United States. The Swatantra Party gained strength 
in different parts of the Country by way of merger with 
numerous regional parties and interests. It attracted 
the landlords and princes who wanted to protect 
their land and status that was being threatened by 
the land reforms legislation. The industrialists and 
business class who were against nationalisation and 
the licensing policies also supported the party. Its 
narrow social base and the lack of a dedicated cadre 
of party members did not allow it to build a strong 
organisational network.
Swatantra Party
C. Rajagopalachari        
(1878-1972): A senior leader 
of Congress and literary 
writer; close associate of 
Mahatma Gandhi; member 
of Constituent Assembly; first 
Indian to be the Governor 
General of India (1948-
1950); minister in Union 
Cabinet; later became Chief 
Minister of Madras state; 
first recipient of the Bharat 
Ratna Award; founder of the 
Swatantra Party (1959). 
Era o  One-party Dominance                                                                                41  
2018-19
42                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
these parties prevented the resentment with the system from turning 
anti-democratic. These parties also groomed the leaders who were to 
play a crucial role in the shaping of our country.
In the early years there was a lot of mutual respect between 
the leaders of the Congress and those of the opposition. The 
interim government that ruled the country after the declaration of 
Independence and the first general election included opposition 
leaders like Dr. Ambedkar and Shyama Prasad Mukherjee in the 
cabinet. Jawaharlal Nehru often referred to his fondness for the 
Socialist Party and invited socialist leaders like Jayaprakash Narayan 
to join his government. This kind of personal relationship with and 
respect for political adversaries declined after the party competition 
grew more intense.
Thus this first phase of democratic politics in our country was 
quite unique.  The inclusive character of the national movement led 
by the Congress enabled it to attract different sections, groups and 
interests making it a broad based social and ideological coalition. The 
Nehru’s Cabinet after the swearing-in of Chakravarti Rajagopalachari as Governor-General in 1948. 
Sitting from left to right: Rafi Ahmad Kidwai, Baldev Singh, Maulana Azad, Prime Minister Nehru, 
Chakravarti Rajagopalachari, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, Mr. John Matthai 
and Jagjivan Ram. Standing from left to right: Mr. Gadgil, Mr. Neogi, Dr. Ambedkar, Shyama 
Prasad Mukherji, Mr. Gopalaswamy Iyengar and Mr. Jayramdas Daulatram.
                ……Tandon’s 
elec ion is considered 
(by Congre   members) 
more important than my 
pre ence in the Govt or the 
Congre  …..  .. .. … ..I have 
comple ely e hausted my 
utility bo h in the Congre   
and Govt. 
Jawaharlal Nehru
in a letter to Rajaji, after 
the election of Tandon 
as Congress president 
against his wishes.
“
“
2018-19
Era o  One-party Dominance                                                                                43  
Party compe ition in a Bihar village
When two buffalos fight, the grass beneath them gets crushed. The 
Congress and Socialist parties are fighting with each other. Both of 
them are seeking new members. The poor people will be ground 
between the two grindstones! 
“No, the poor people won’t be crushed. In fact, they’ll benefit”, was 
someone’s reply. “Things aren’t accomplished by one party alone. It 
is the competition and rivalry between two groups that benefits the 
public...”
The news of Socialist Party meeting had agitated the Santhals. The 
news of the opening of the hospital hadn’t made much impression on 
them – nor did they ever bother much about the fights and quarrels, 
or the friendly gatherings of the villagers. But this meeting was for the 
tillers of the soil. .... “To whom does the land belong? To the tiller! 
He who tills will sow! He who sows will harvest! He who works will eat, come what may!” 
Kalicharan lectured.... 
There was turmoil in the District Office of the Congress Party too. They were about to elect a 
Party Chairman. There were four candidates — two real contenders and two dummy candidates. 
It was a contest between Rajputs and Bhumihars The wealthy businessmen and zamindars 
from both the castes were cruising all over the district in their motorcars, campaigning. All 
kinds of mudslinging was going on between them. The Seth who owned the Katihar cotton mill 
was representing the Bhumihar party, and the owner of Farbigang jute mill was representing 
the Rajputs …. You should see the money they’re flashing around.
Translated extracts from Fanishwarnath Renu’s novel “Maila Anchal”. The novel is set in 
Purnia district in North East Bihar in the early years after Independence.
Shyama Prasad Mukherjee 
(1901-1953): Leader of 
Hindu Mahasabha;  founder 
of Bharatiya Jana Sangh; 
Minister in Nehru’s first cabinet 
after Independence; resigned 
in 1950 due to differences 
over relations with Pakistan; 
Member of Constituent 
Assembly and later, the first Lok Sabha; 
was opposed to India’s policy of autonomy 
to Jammu & Kashmir; arrested during Jana 
Sangh’s agitation against Kashmir policy; died 
during detention. 
key role of the Congress in the freedom 
struggle thus gave it a head start over 
others. As the ability of the Congress 
to accommodate all interests and all 
aspirants for political power steadily 
declined, other political parties started 
gaining greater significance. Thus, 
Congress dominance constitutes only 
one phase in the politics of the country. 
We shall come to the other phases in 
later parts of this textbook.
Fanishwarnath Renu
2018-19
44                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
EXERCISES
1. 
Choose the correct option to fill in the blanks.
 (a) The First General Elections in 1952 involved simultaneous 
elections to the Lok Sabha and ………………….(The President of 
India/ State Assemblies/ Rajya Sabha/ The Prime Minister)
 (b) The party that won the second largest number of Lok Sabha seats 
in the first elections was the………………….(Praja Socialist Party/ 
Bharatiya Jana Sangh/ Communist Party of India/Bharatiya Janata 
Party)
 (c) One of the guiding principles of the ideology of the Swatantra 
Party was………………….(Working class interests/ protection of 
Princely States / economy free from State control / Autonomy of 
States within the Union)
2. 
Match the following leaders listed in List A with the parties in List B.
                       List A                                                  List B
  
(a) 
S. A. Dange 
 
 
 
 
i. 
 
Bharatiya Jana Sangh
  
(b) 
Shyama Prasad Mukherjee 
ii.  
Swatantra Party
  
(c) 
Minoo Masani  
 
 
 
iii.  
Praja Socialist Party
  
(d) 
Asoka Mehta  
 
 
 
iv.  
Communist Party of India
3. 
Four statements regarding one- party dominance are given below. Mark 
each of them as true or false.
(a) One-party dominance is rooted in the absence of strong alternative 
political parties.
(b) One-party dominance occurs because of weak public opinion.
(c) 
One-party dominance is linked to the nation’s colonial past.
(d) One-party dominance reflects the absence of democratic ideals in 
a country.
4. 
If Bharatiya Jana Sangh or the Communist Party of India had formed the 
government after the first election, in which respects would the policies 
of the government have been different? Specify three differences each 
for both the parties.
5. 
In what sense was the Congress an ideological coalition? Mention the 
various ideological currents present within the Congress.
6. 
Did the prevalence of a ‘one party dominant system’ affect adversely 
the democratic nature of Indian politics?  
7. 
Bring out three differences each between Socialist parties and the 
Communist party and between Bharatiya Jana Sangh and Swatantra 
Party.
8. 
What would you consider as the main differences between Mexico and 
India under one party domination? 
44                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
2018-19
Era o  One-party Dominance                                                                                45  
  9. Take a political map of India (with State outlines) and mark:
(a) two states where Congress was not in power at some point 
 
during 1952-67.
(b) two states where the Congress remained in power through 
 
this period.
10. Read the following passage and answer the questions below:
  
“Patel, the organisational man of the Congress, wanted to purge the 
Congress of other political groups and sought to make of it a cohesive 
and disciplined political party. He …. sought to take the Congress away 
from its all-embracing character and turn it into a close-knit party of 
disciplined cadres. Being a ‘realist’ he looked more for discipline than 
for comprehension. While Gandhi took too romantic a view of “carrying 
on the movement,” Patel’s idea of transforming the Congress into 
strictly political party with a single ideology and tight discipline showed 
an equal lack of understanding of the eclectic role that the Congress, 
as a government, was to be called upon to perform in the decades to 
follow.”   — RAJNI KOTHARI
(a) Why does the author think that Congress should not have been 
 
a cohesive and disciplined party? 
(b) Give some examples of the eclectic role of the Congress party 
 
in the early years.
(c) 
Why does the author say that Gandhi’s view about 
 
Congress’ future was romantic?
 
LET US DO IT TOGETHER
Make a chart of elections and governments in your State since 1952. 
The chart could have the following columns: year of election, name of 
the winning party, name of ruling party or parties, name of the Chief 
Minister(s).
Era o  One-party Dominance                                                                                45  
2018-19
In this chapter…
In the last two chapters we have studied how the leaders of independent 
India responded to the challenges of nation-building and establishing 
democracy. Let us now turn to the third challenge, that of economic 
development to ensure well-being of all. As in the case of the first two 
challenges, our leaders chose a path that was different and difficult. In 
this case their success was much more limited, for this challenge was 
tougher and more enduring.
In this chapter, we study the story of political choices involved in some 
of the key questions of economic development. 
• 
What were the key choices and debates about development?
• 
Which strategy was adopted by our leaders in the first two  
 
 
 
decades? And why?
• 
What were the main achievements and limitations of this strategy?
• 
Why was this development strategy abandoned in later years?
Stamps like these, 
issued mostly between 
1955 and 1968, 
depicted a vision of 
planned development. 
Left to right, top to 
bottom: Damodar 
Valley, Bhakra 
Dam, Chittaranjan 
Locomotives, Gauhati 
Refinery, Tractor, Sindri 
Fertilisers, Bhakra Dam, 
Electric Train, Wheat 
Revolution, Hirakud 
Dam, Hindustan Aircraft 
Factory 
2018-19
3
chapter
politics of planned 
development
As the global demand for steel increases, Orissa, which has one of 
the largest reserves of untapped iron ore in the country, is being 
seen as an important investment destination. The State government 
hopes to cash in on this unprecedented demand for iron ore and 
has signed Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with both 
international and domestic steel makers. The government believes 
that this would bring in necessary capital investment and proivde a 
lot of employment opportunities. The iron ore resources lie in some 
of the most underdeveloped and predominantly tribal districts of the 
state. The tribal population fears that the setting up of industries 
would mean displacement from their home and livelihood. The 
environmentalists fear that mining and industry would 
pollute the environment. The central government feels 
that if the industry is not allowed it would set a bad 
example and discourage investments in the country.
Can you identify the various interests involved in this 
case? What are their key points of conflict? Do you think 
there are any common points on which everyone can 
agree? Can this issue be resolved in a way which satisfies 
all the various interests? As you ask these questions, you 
would find yourself facing yet bigger questions. What 
kind of development does Orissa need? Indeed, whose 
need can be called Orissa’s need? 
Political contestation
These questions cannot be answered by an expert. 
Decisions of this kind involve weighing the interests of 
one social group against another, present generation 
against future generations. In a democracy such major 
decisions should be taken or at least approved by the 
people themselves.  It is important to take advice from 
experts on mining, from environmentalists and from 
economists. Yet the final decision must be a political 
decision, taken by people’s representatives who are in 
touch with the feelings of the people. 
After Independence our country had to make a series 
of major decisions like this. Each of these decisions 
could not be made independent of other such decisions. 
All these decisions were bound together by a shared 
vision or model of economic development. Almost 
 ✁
✂
✄
✄
☎
✆
✝
✞
✟
✁
✆
✟
✠
✡
☛
✠
☞
✌
✍
 ✎
☞
☎
✏
✑
✆
✞
✝
✒
✆
✄
✂
✓
✔
✕
✖
✗
✔
✘
✝
✒
✂
✓
✆
✙
✆
✕
✁
✚
✛
✁
✜
✆
✝
✟
✞
✝
✞
✘
✆
✗
✑
✢
 ✣
✢
✤
✥
✕
✗
✔
✂
✘
✁
✆
✆
✒
✝
✒
✂
✕
✁
✔
✕
✦
✂
✖
✂
✁
✘
✔
✕
✖
✜
✝
✧
✟
✗
✔
✘
✁
✟
✔
✓
✁
✘
✁
✂
✖
✆
✗
✂
✗
✆
✙
✞
✕
✘
✁
✟
✂
✁
✔
✞
✕
✞
✧
✁
✘
✔
✗
✆
✁
✜
✆
★
✞
✟
✆
✂
✕
✓
✞
✙
✝
✂
✕
✛
✩
✘
✞
✄
✄
✔
✓
✆
✜
✆
✟
✆
✞
✕
✪
✜
✧
✟
✘
✗
✂
✛
✫
✪
✜
✆
✛
✬
✆
✟
✆
✗
✆
✙
✂
✕
✗
✔
✕
✖
✓
✂
✕
✓
✆
✒
✒
✂
✁
✔
✞
✕
✞
✄
✁
✜
✆
✙
✆
✙
✞
✟
✂
✕
✗
✧
✙
✞
✄
✧
✕
✗
✆
✟
✘
✁
✂
✕
✗
✔
✕
✖
✘
✔
✖
✕
✆
✗
✚
✆
✁
✬
✆
✆
✕
✁
✜
✆
✓
✞
✙
✝
✂
✕
✛
✂
✕
✗
✁
✜
✆
✢
✟
✔
✘
✘
✂
✖
✞
✭
✆
✟
✕
✙
✆
✕
✁
✞
✕
✆
✛
✆
✂
✟
✂
✖
✞
✫
✮
✞
✟
✆
✁
✜
✂
✕
✯
✰
✰
✙
✆
✕
✂
✕
✗
✬
✞
✙
✆
✕
✄
✟
✞
✙
✁
✜
✆
✖
✟
✂
✙
✝
✂
✕
✓
✜
✂
✛
✂
✁
✘
✞
✄
✱
✜
✔
✕
✲
✔
✂
✳
✌
✧
✂
✖
✂
✞
✕
✂
✕
✗
✴
✂
✗
✂
✲
✧
✵
✂
✕
✖
✂
✁
✟
✔
✆
✗
✁
✞
✆
✕
✁
✆
✟
✁
✜
✆
✞
✄
✄
✔
✓
✆
✝
✟
✆
✙
✔
✘
✆
✘
✚
✧
✁
✁
✜
✆
✝
✞
✒
✔
✓
✆
✝
✟
✆
✭
✆
✕
✁
✆
✗
✁
✜
✆
✙
✫
☎
✂
✔
✘
✔
✕
✖
✘
✒
✞
✖
✂
✕
✘
✳
✁
✜
✆
✝
✟
✞
✁
✆
✘
✁
✆
✟
✘
✘
✂
✔
✗
✁
✜
✆
✓
✞
✙
✝
✂
✕
✛
✘
✜
✞
✧
✒
✗
✕
✞
✁
✚
✆
✂
✒
✒
✞
✬
✆
✗
✁
✞
✘
✆
✁
✧
✝
✔
✁
✘
✝
✒
✂
✕
✁
✂
✁
✁
✜
✆
✓
✞
✘
✁
✞
✄
✁
✜
✆
✔
✟
✒
✔
✭
✆
✘
✂
✕
✗
✒
✔
✭
✆
✒
✔
✜
✞
✞
✗
✫
✪
✜
✆
✗
✆
✙
✞
✕
✘
✁
✟
✂
✁
✔
✞
✕
✬
✂
✘
✞
✟
✖
✂
✕
✔
✘
✆
✗
✚
✛
✁
✜
✆
☎
✂
✘
✜
✁
✟
✔
✛
✂
✶
✧
✭
✂
 ✂
✕
✖
✂
✁
✜
✂
✕
✂
✕
✗
✁
✜
✆
✌
✂
✚
✂
✕
✔
✟
✙
✂
✕
 ✂
✙
✔
✁
✔
✫
✷
✸
✹
✺
✻
✼
✽
✾
✿
❀
❁
❂
✾
✼
✹
❀
❃
❃
❄
2018-19
48                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
everyone agreed that the development 
of India should mean both economic 
growth and social and economic 
justice. It was also agreed that this 
matter cannot be left to businessmen, 
industrialists and farmers themselves, 
that the government should play a key 
role in this. There was disagreement, 
however, on the kind of role that the 
government must play in ensuring 
growth with justice. Was it necessary 
to have a centralised institution to 
plan for the entire country? Should 
the government itself run some key 
industries and business? How much 
importance was to be attached to the 
needs of justice if it differed from the 
requirements of economic growth? 
Each of these questions involved 
contestation which has continued ever 
since. Each of the decision had political 
consequence. Most of these issues involved political judgement and 
required consultations among political parties and approval of the 
public. That is why we need to study the process of development as a 
part of the history of politics in India.    
Ideas of development
Very often this contestation involves the very idea of development. The 
example of Orissa shows us that it is not enough to say that everyone 
wants development. For ‘development’ has different meanings for 
different sections of the people. Development would mean different 
things for example, to an industrialist who is planning to set up a 
steel plant, to an urban consumer of steel and to the Adivasi who 
lives in that region.  Thus any discussion on development is bound to 
generate contradictions, conflicts and debates. 
The first decade after Independence witnessed a lot of debate around 
this question. It was common then, as it is even now, for people to refer 
to the ‘West’  as the standard for measuring development. ‘Development’ 
was about becoming more ‘modern’ and modern was about becoming 
more like the industrialised countries of the West. This is how common 
people as well as the experts thought.  It was believed that every country 
would go through the process of modernisation as in the West, which 
involved the breakdown of traditional social structures and the rise 
of capitalism and liberalism. Modernisation was also associated with 
the ideas of growth, material progress and scientific rationality.  This 
kind of idea of development allowed everyone to talk about different 
countries as developed, developing or underdeveloped. 
What is Left and what is Right?
In the politics of most countries, you will always 
come across references to parties and groups 
with a Left or Right  ideology or leaning. These terms 
characterise the position of the concerned groups or 
parties regarding social change and role of the state 
in effecting economic redistribution. Left often refers 
to those who are in favour of the poor, downtrodden 
sections and support government policies for the 
benefit of these sections. The Right refers to those 
who believe that free competition and market economy 
alone ensure progress and that the government should 
not unnecessarily intervene in the economy. 
Can you tell which of the parties in the 1960s were 
Rightist and which were the Left parties? Where 
would you place the Congress party of that time? 
2018-19
Politics o  Planned Development                                                                           49  
On the eve of Independence, India had before it, two models 
of modern development: the liberal-capitalist model as in much of 
Europe and the US and the socialist model as in the USSR. You have 
already studied these two ideologies and read about the ‘cold war’ 
between the two super powers. There were many in India then who 
were deeply impressed by the Soviet model of development. These 
included not just the leaders of the Communist Party of India, but 
also those of the Socialist Party and leaders like Nehru within the 
Congress. There were very few supporters of the American style 
capitalist development. 
This reflected a broad consensus that had developed during 
the national movement.  The nationalist leaders were clear that the 
economic concerns of the government of free India would  have to 
be different from the narrowly defined commercial functions of the 
colonial government. It was clear, moreover, that the task of poverty 
alleviation and social and economic redistribution was being seen 
primarily as the responsibility of the government.    There were debates 
among them. For some, industrialisation seemed to be the preferred 
path.  For others, the development of agriculture and in particular 
alleviation of rural poverty was the priority. 
Planning
Despite the various differences, there was a consensus on one point: 
that development could not be left to private actors, that there was the 
need for the government to develop a design or plan for development. 
In fact the idea of planning as a process of rebuilding economy earned 
a good deal of public support in the 1940s and 1950s all over the 
world. The experience of Great Depression in Europe, the inter-war 
Are you saying 
we don’t have 
to be western 
in order to be 
modern? Is that 
possible?
Credit: Hindustan Times
Nehru 
addressing 
the staff of 
the Planning 
Commission
2018-19
50                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
                                                               
50    
Politics in India since Independence
Planning Commission
Do you recall any reference to the Planning Commission in your book 
Constitution at Work last year? Actually there was none, for the Planning 
Commission is not one of the many commissions and other bodies set up by 
the Constitution. The Planning Commission was set up in March, 1950 by a 
simple resolution of the Government of India. It has an advisory role and its 
recommendations become effective only when the Union Cabinet approved 
these. The resolution which set up the Commission defined the scope of its 
work in the following terms :
“The Constitution of India has guaranteed certain Fundamental Rights to the 
citizens of India and enunciated certain Directive Principles of State Policy, 
in particular, that the State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people 
by securing and protecting….a social order in which justice, social, economic 
and political, shall ……..  …. direct its policy towards securing, among other 
things,
(a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an  
 
 
 
adequate means of livelihood ; 
(b) that the ownership and control of the material resources of the  
 
 
 
community  are so distributed as best to subserve the common good;   
 
and 
(c) that the operation of the economic system does not result in 
the  concentration of wealth and means of production to the common 
detriment.
I wonder if the Planning 
Commission has 
actually followed these 
objectives in practice.
I wonder if the Planning 
Credit:Ninan 
The Government of India 
replaced 
the 
Planning 
Commission with a new 
institution 
named 
NITI 
Aayog (National Institution 
for Transforming India). 
This came into existence 
on 1 January 2015. Find 
out about its objectives 
and composition from the 
website, http://niti.gov.in
Fast Forward   
Niti Aayog
2018-19
Politics o  Planned Development                                                                           51  
reconstruction of Japan and Germany, and most of all the spectacular 
economic growth against heavy odds in the Soviet Union in the 1930s 
and 1940s contributed to this consensus.
Thus the Planning Commission was not a sudden invention. In fact, 
it has a very interesting history. We commonly assume that private 
investors, such as industrialists and big business entrepreneurs, 
are averse to ideas of planning: they seek an open economy without 
any state control in the flow of capital. That was not what happened 
here. Rather, a section of the big industrialists got together in 1944 
and drafted a joint proposal for setting up a planned economy in the 
country. It was called the Bombay Plan. The Bombay Plan wanted 
the state to take major initiatives in industrial and other economic 
investments. Thus, from left to right, planning for development was 
the most obvious choice for the country after Independence. Soon 
after India became independent, the Planning Commission came into 
being. The Prime Minister was its Chairperson. It became the most 
influential and central machinery for deciding what path and strategy 
India would adopt for its development. 
T e Early  Initiative 
As in the USSR, the Planning Commission of India opted for five year 
plans (FYP). The idea is very simple: the Government of India prepares 
a document that has a plan for all its income and expenditure for the 
next five years.  Accordingly the budget of the central and all the State 
governments is divided into two parts: ‘non-plan’ budget that is spent 
on routine items on a yearly basis and ‘plan’ budget that is spent on a 
five year basis as per the priorities fixed by the plan.  A five year plan 
has the advantage of permitting the government to focus on the larger 
picture and make long-term intervention in the economy.
2018-19
52                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
The draft of the First Five Year Plan and then the actual Plan 
Document, released in December 1951, generated a lot of excitement 
in the country. People from all walks of life – academics, journalists, 
government and private sector employees, industrialists, farmers, 
politicians etc. – discussed and debated the documents extensively. 
The excitement with planning reached its peak with the launching of 
the Second Five Year Plan in 1956 and continued somewhat till the 
Third Five Year Plan in 1961. The Fourth Plan was due to start in 1966. 
By this time, the novelty of planning had declined considerably, and 
moreover, India was facing acute economic crisis. The government 
decided to take a ‘plan holiday’. Though many criticisms emerged both 
about the process and the priorities of these plans, the foundation of 
India’s economic development was firmly in place by then. 
The First Five Year Plan
The First Five Year Plan (1951–1956) sought to get the country’s 
economy out of the cycle of poverty. K.N. Raj, a young economist 
involved in drafting the plan, argued that India should ‘hasten 
slowly’ for the first two decades as a fast rate of development might 
endanger democracy. The First Five Year Plan addressed, mainly, 
the agrarian sector including investment in dams and irrigation. 
Th
d
ft
f th
Fi
t Fi
Y
Pl
d th
th
t
l Pl
Credit: Sudhir Dar/UNDP and Planning Commission
First Five Year Plan 
document
2018-19
Politics o  Planned Development                                                                           53  
Agricultural sector was hit hardest by Partition and needed urgent 
attention. Huge allocations were made for large-scale projects like 
the Bhakhra Nangal Dam. The Plan identified the pattern of land 
distribution in the country as the principal obstacle in the way of 
agricultural growth. It focused on land reforms as the key to the 
country’s development.
One of the basic aims of the planners was to raise the level of 
national income, which could be possible only if the people saved 
more money than they spent. As the basic level of spending was 
very low in the 1950s, it could not be reduced any more. So the 
planners sought to push savings up. That too was difficult as the 
total capital stock in the country was rather low compared to the 
total number of employable people. Nevertheless, people’s savings 
did rise in the first phase of the planned process until the end of 
the Third Five Year Plan. But, the rise was not as spectacular as 
was expected at the beginning of the First Plan. Later, from the 
early 1960s till the early 1970s, the proportion of savings in the 
country actually dropped consistently. 
Rapid Industrialisation
The Second FYP stressed on heavy industries. It was drafted 
by a team of economists and planners under the leadership of 
P. C. Mahalanobis. If the first plan had preached patience, the 
second wanted to bring about quick structural transformation by 
making changes simultaneously in all possible directions. Before 
this plan was finalised, the Congress party at its session held at 
Avadi near the then Madras city, passed an important resolution. 
It declared that ‘socialist pattern of society’ was its goal. This was 
reflected in the Second Plan. The government imposed substantial 
tariffs on imports in order to protect domestic industries. Such 
protected environment helped both public and private sector 
industries to grow. As savings and investment were growing in this 
period, a bulk of these industries like electricity, railways, steel, 
machineries and communication could be developed in the public 
sector. Indeed, such a push for industrialisation marked a turning 
point in India’s development.
It, however, had its problems as well. India was technologically 
backward, so it had to spend precious foreign exchange to buy 
technology from the global market. That apart, as industry attracted 
more investment than agriculture, the possibility of food shortage 
loomed large. The Indian planners found balancing industry and 
agriculture really difficult. The Third Plan was not significantly 
different from the Second. Critics pointed out that the plan 
strategies from this time around displayed an unmistakable 
“urban bias”. Others thought that industry was wrongly given 
priority over agriculture. There were also those who wanted focus 
on agriculture-related industries rather than heavy ones.
P.C. Mahalanobis 
(1893-1972): 
Scientist and 
statistician of 
international repute; 
founder of Indian 
Statistical Institute 
(1931);  architect of 
the Second Plan; 
supporter of rapid 
industrialisation and 
active role of the 
public sector.
Tenth Five Year Plan 
document
2018-19
54                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
Ke  Controversie 
The strategy of development followed 
in the early years raised several 
important questions. Let us examine 
two of these disputes that continue 
to be relevant.
Agriculture versus industry
We have already touched upon a big 
question: between agriculture and 
industry, which one should attract 
more public resources in a backward 
economy like that of India? Many 
thought that the Second Plan lacked 
an agrarian strategy for development, 
and the emphasis on industry 
caused agriculture and rural India 
to 
suffer. 
Gandhian 
economists 
like J. C. Kumarappa proposed an 
alternative blueprint that put greater 
emphasis on rural industrialisation. 
Chaudhary Charan Singh, a Congress 
leader who later broke from the 
party to form Bharatiya Lok Dal, 
Decentralised planning
It is not necessary that all planning always has to 
be centralised; nor is it that planning is only about 
big industries and large projects. The ‘Kerala 
model’ is the name given to the path of planning 
and development charted by the State of Kerala. 
There has been a focus in this model on education, 
health, land reform, effective food distribution, and 
poverty alleviation. Despite low per capita incomes, 
and a relatively weak industrial base, Kerala 
achieved nearly total literacy, long life expectancy, 
low infant and female mortality, low birth rates 
and high access to medical care.  Between 1987 
and 1991, the government launched the New 
Democratic Initiative which involved campaigns 
for development (including total literacy especially 
in science and environment) designed to involve 
people directly in development activities through 
voluntary citizens’ organisations. The State has 
also taken initiative to involve people in making 
plans at the Panchayat, block and district level.
2018-19
Politics o  Planned Development                                                                           55  
J.C. Kumarappa 
(1892-1960): Original name 
J.C. Cornelius; economist and 
chartered accountant; studied 
in England and USA; follower 
of Mahatma Gandhi; tried to 
apply Gandhian principles to 
economic policies; author of 
‘Economy of Permanence’; 
participated in planning 
process as member of the 
Planning Commission
forcefully articulated the case for 
keeping agriculture at the centre of 
planning for India. He said that the 
planning was leading to creation of 
prosperity in urban and industrial 
section at the expense of the 
farmers and rural population. 
Others thought that without 
a drastic increase in industrial 
production, there could be no 
escape from the cycle of poverty. 
They argued that Indian planning 
did have an agrarian strategy 
to boost the production of food-
grains. The state made laws for 
land reforms and distribution of 
resources among the poor in the 
villages. It also proposed progra-
mmes of community development 
and spent large sums on irrigation 
projects. The failure was not that of 
policy but its non-implementation, 
because the landowning classes 
Let’s watch a Film
PATHER PANCHALI
This film tells the story of a poor 
family in a Bengal village and its 
struggle to survive. Durga, the 
daughter of Harihar and Sarbajaya, 
with her younger brother, Apu, 
goes on enjoying life oblivious of 
the struggles and the poverty. The 
film revolves around the simple 
life and the efforts of the mother 
of Durga and Apu to maintain 
the family. 
Pather Panchali (Song of the Little 
Road) narrates the desires and 
disappointments of the poor family 
through the tale of the youngsters. 
Finally, during monsoon, Durga 
falls ill and dies while her father 
is away. Harihar returns with gifts, 
including a sari for Durga…..
The film won numerous awards 
nationally 
and 
internationally, 
including the President’s Gold and 
Silver medals for the year 1955.
Year: 1955
Director: Satyajit Ray
Story: Bibhutibhushan 
Bandyopadhyay 
Screenplay: Satyajit Ray 
Actors: Kanu Bannerjee, Karuna 
Bannerjee, Subir Bannerjee, Uma 
Das Gupta Durga, Chunibala Devi
2018-19
56                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
had lot of social and political power. Besides, they also argue that 
even if the government had spent more money on agriculture it would 
not have solved the massive problem of rural poverty.
Public versus private sector
India did not follow any of the two known paths to development – it did 
not accept the capitalist model of development in which development 
was left entirely to the private sector, nor did it follow the socialist 
model in which private property was abolished and all the production 
was controlled by the state. Elements from both these models were 
taken and mixed together in India. That is why it was described as 
‘mixed economy’. Much of the agriculture, trade and industry were left 
in private hands. The state controlled key heavy industries, provided 
industrial infrastructure, regulated trade and made some crucial 
interventions in agriculture. 
A mixed model like this was open to criticism from both the left 
and the right. Critics argued that the planners refused to provide 
the private sector with enough space and the stimulus to grow. 
The enlarged public sector produced powerful vested interests that 
Astride the Public 
Sector are Central 
Ministers Lal Bahadur 
Shastri, Ajit Prasad 
Jain, Kailash Nath 
Katju, Jagjivan Ram, 
T. T. Krishnamachari, 
Swaran Singh, 
Gulzari Lal Nanda and 
B. V. Keskar 
Credit: Shankar, 6 May 1956
2018-19
Politics o  Planned Development                                                                           57  
created enough hurdles for private capital, especially by way of 
installing systems of licenses and permits for investment. Moreover, 
the state’s policy to restrict import of goods that could be produced 
in the domestic market with little or no competition left the private 
sector with no incentive to improve their products and make them 
cheaper. The state controlled more things than were necessary and 
this led to inefficiency and corruption.
Then there were critics who thought that the state did not do 
enough. They pointed out that the state did not spend any significant 
amount for public education and healthcare. The state intervened 
only in those areas where the private sector was not prepared to go. 
Thus the state helped the private sector to make profit. Also, instead 
of helping the poor, the state intervention ended up creating a new 
‘middle class’ that enjoyed the privileges of high salaries without 
much accountability. Poverty did not decline substantially during this 
period; even when the proportion of the poor reduced, their numbers 
kept going up.
Major Outcome 
Of the three objectives that were identified in independent India, 
discussed in the first three chapters here, the third objective proved 
most difficult to realise. Land reforms did not take place effectively in 
most parts of the country; political power remained in the hands of 
the landowning classes; and big industrialists continued to benefit 
and thrive while poverty did not reduce much. The early initiatives 
for planned development were at best realising the goals of economic 
development of the country and well-being of all its citizens. The 
inability to take significant steps in this direction in the very first 
stage was to become a political problem. Those who benefited from 
unequal development soon became politically powerful and made it 
even more difficult to move in the desired direction. 
Foundations
An assessment of the outcomes of this early phase of planned 
development must begin by acknowledging the fact that in this period 
the foundations of India’s future economic growth were laid. Some of 
the largest developmental projects in India’s history were undertaken 
during this period. These included mega-dams like Bhakhra-Nangal 
and Hirakud for irrigation and power generation. Some of the 
heavy industries in the public sector – steel plants, oil refineries, 
manufacturing units, defense production etc. – were started during 
this period. Infrastructure for transport and communication was 
improved substantially. Of late, some of these mega projects have 
come in for a lot of criticism. Yet much of the later economic growth, 
including that by the private sector, may not have been possible in 
the absence of these foundations.
2018-19
58                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
Government Campaign reache  the village
“In a way the advertisement stuck or written on walls gave an accurate introduction to the 
villager’s problems and how to solve them. For example, the problem was that India was a 
farming nation, but farmers refused to produce more grain out of sheer perversity. The solution 
was to give speeches to farmers and show them all sorts of attractive pictures. These advised 
them that if they didn’t want to grow more grain for themselves then they should do so for the 
nation. As a result the posters were stuck in various places to induce farmers to grow grain 
for the nation. The farmers were greatly influenced by the combined effect of the speeches 
and posters, and even most simple-minded cultivator began to feel the likelihood of there was 
some ulterior motive behind the whole campaign.
One advertisement had become especially well known in Shivpalganj. It showed a healthy 
farmer with turban wrapped around his head, earrings and a quilted jacket, cutting a tall crop 
of wheat with a sickle. A woman was standing behind him, very pleased with herself; she was 
laughing like an official from the Department of Agriculture. 
Below and above the picture was written in Hindi and English – ‘Grow More Grain’. Farmers 
with earrings and a quilted jacket who were also scholars of English were expected to be won 
over by the English slogans, and those who were scholars of Hindi, by the Hindi version. And 
those who didn’t know how to read either language could at least recognise the figures of the 
man and the laughing woman. The government hoped that as soon as they saw the man and 
the laughing woman, farmer would turn away from the poster and start growing more grain like 
men possessed”. 
Extracts of translation from ‘Raag Darbari’ by Shrilal Shukla. The satire is set in a village 
Shivpalganj in Uttar Pradesh in the 1960s.
Land reforms
In the agrarian sector, this period witnessed a serious attempt at 
land reforms. Perhaps the most significant and successful of these 
was the abolition of the colonial system of zamindari. This bold act 
not only released land from the clutches of a class that had little 
interest in agriculture, it also reduced the capacity of the landlords 
to dominate politics. Attempts at consolidation of land – bringing 
small pieces of land together in one place so that the farm size could 
become viable for agriculture – were also fairly successful. But the 
other two components of land reforms were much less successful. 
Though the laws were made to put an upper limit or ‘ceiling’ to how 
much agricultural land one person could own, people with excess 
land managed to evade the law. Similarly, the tenants who worked on 
someone else’s land were given greater legal security against eviction, 
but this provision was rarely implemented.
It was not easy to turn these well-meaning policies on agriculture 
into genuine and effective action. This could happen only if the rural, 
landless poor were mobilised. But the landowners were very powerful 
and wielded considerable political influence. Therefore, many proposals 
for land reforms were either not translated into laws, or, when made into 
Oh! I thought land 
reforms were about 
improving the quality of 
soil!
2018-19
Politics o  Planned Development                                                                           59  
Food Crisis
The agricultural situation went from bad to worse in the 1960s. Already, the rate of growth of 
food grain production in the 1940s and 1950s was barely staying above rate of population 
growth. Between 1965 and 1967, severe droughts occurred in many parts of the country. As 
we shall study in the next chapter, this was also the period when the country faced two wars 
and foreign exchange crisis. All this resulted in a severe food shortage and famine – like 
conditions in many parts of the country. 
 
It was in Bihar that the food-crisis was most acutely felt as the state faced a near-famine 
situation. The food shortage was significant in all districts of Bihar, with 9 districts producing 
less than half of their normal output. Five of these districts, in fact, produced less than one-third 
of what they produced normally. Food deprivation subsequently led to acute and widespread 
malnutrition. It was estimated that the calorie intake dropped from 2200 per capita per day to 
as low as 1200 in many regions of the state (as against the requirement of 2450 per day for 
the average person). Death rate in Bihar in 1967 was 34% higher than the number of deaths 
that occurred in the following year. Food prices also hit a high in Bihar during the year, even 
when compared with other north Indian states. For wheat and rice the prices in the state were 
twice or more than their prices in more prosperous Punjab. The government had  “zoning” 
policies that prohibited trade of food across states; this reduced the availability of food in Bihar 
dramatically. In situations such as this, the poorest sections of the society suffered the most. 
 
The food crisis had many consequences. The government had to import wheat and had to 
accept foreign aid, mainly from the US. Now the first priority of the planners was to somehow 
attain self-sufficiency in food. The entire planning process and sense of optimism and pride 
associated with it suffered a setback. 
                                                                                                                            59  
2018-19
60                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
laws, they remained only on paper. This shows that economic policy is 
part of the actual political situation in the society. It also shows that in 
spite of good wishes of some top leaders, the dominant social groups 
would always effectively control policy making and implementation. 
The Green Revolution
In the face of the prevailing food-crisis, the country was clearly 
vulnerable to external pressures and dependent on food aid, mainly 
from the United States. The United States, in turn, pushed India to 
change its economic policies. The government adopted a new strategy 
for agriculture in order to ensure food sufficiency. Instead of the 
earlier policy of giving more support to the areas and farmers that 
were lagging behind, now it was decided to put more resources into 
those areas which already had irrigation and those farmers who were 
already well-off. The argument was that those who already had the 
capacity could help increase production rapidly in the short run. 
Thus the government offered high-yielding variety seeds, fertilizers, 
pesticides and better irrigation at highly subsidised prices. The 
government also gave a guarantee to buy the produce of the farmers 
at a given price.   This was the beginning of what was called the ‘green 
revolution’. 
The rich peasants and the large landholders were the major 
beneficiaries of the process. The green revolution delivered only a 
moderate agricultural growth (mainly a rise in wheat production) and 
raised the availability of food in the country, but increased polarisation 
between classes and regions. Some regions like Punjab, Haryana 
and western Uttar Pradesh became agriculturally prosperous, while 
others remained backward. The green revolution had two other 
effects: one was that in many parts, the stark contrast between the 
poor peasantry and the landlords produced conditions favourable for 
 Let’s re-search
Srikanth still remembers the struggle his elder brother had to undergo 
in order to get the monthly supply of ration for the ration shop. Their 
family was totally dependent on the supplies from the ration shop for 
rice, oil and kerosene. Many times, his brother would stand in the 
queue for an hour or so only to find out that the supply had ended and 
he would have to come later when fresh supply arrives. Find out from 
talking to elders in your family what is a ration card and ask your elders 
what, if any, items they buy from the ration shop. Visit a ration shop in 
the vicinity of your school or home and find out what is the difference 
in the prices of at least three commodities—wheat\rice, cooking oil, 
sugar—between the ration shop and the open market. 
Why don’t we call it 
wheat revolution? And 
why does everything 
have to be ‘revolution’?
2018-19
Politics o  Planned Development                                                                           61  
leftwing organisations to organise the poor peasants. Secondly, the 
green revolution also resulted in the rise of what is called the middle 
peasant sections. These were farmers with medium size holdings, who 
benefited from the changes and soon emerged politically influential in 
many parts of the country. 
Later developments
The story of development in India took a significant turn from the 
end of 1960s. You will see in Chapter Five how after Nehru’s death 
the Congress system encountered difficulties. Indira Gandhi emerged 
as a popular leader. She decided to further strengthen the role of 
the state in controlling and directing the economy. The period from 
1967 onwards witnessed many new restrictions on private industry. 
Fourteen private banks were nationalised. The government announced 
many pro-poor programmes. These changes were accompanied by an 
ideological tilt towards socialist policies. This emphasis generated 
heated debates within the country among political parties and also 
among experts. 
However, the consensus for a state-led economic development 
did not last forever. Planning did continue, but its salience was 
significantly reduced. Between 1950 and 1980 the Indian economy 
grew at a sluggish per annum rate of 3 to 3.5%. In view of the prevailing 
Fast Forward   The White Revolution
You must be familiar with the jingle ‘utterly butterly delicious’ and 
the endearing figure of the little girl holding a buttered toast.  Yes, the 
Amul advertisements!  Did you know that behind Amul products lies a 
successful history of cooperative dairy farming in India. Verghese Kurien, 
nicknamed the ‘Milkman of India’, played a crucial role in the story of 
Gujarat Cooperative Milk and Marketing Federation Ltd that launched 
Amul.
Based in Anand, a town in Gujarat, Amul is a dairy cooperative movement 
joined by about 2 and half million milk producers in Gujarat.  The Amul 
pattern became a uniquely appropriate model for rural development and 
poverty alleviation, spurring what has come to be known as the White 
Revolution.  In 1970 the rural development programme called Operation Flood was started. 
Operation Flood organised cooperatives of milk producers into a nationwide milk grid, with the 
purpose of increasing milk production, bringing the producer and consumer closer by eliminating 
middlemen, and assuring the producers a regular income throughout the year.  Operation 
Flood was, however, not just a dairy programme.  It saw dairying as a path to development, 
for generating employment and income for rural households and alleviating poverty.  The 
number of members of the cooperative has continued to increase with the numbers of women 
members and Women’s Dairy Cooperative Societies also increasing significantly. 
Politics o  Planned Development                                                                           61  
2018-19
62                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
inefficiency and corruption in some public sector enterprises and the 
not-so-positive role of the bureaucracy in economic development, the 
public opinion in the country lost the faith it initially placed in many 
of these institutions. Such lack of public faith led the policy makers to 
reduce the importance of the state in India’s economy from the 1980s 
onwards. We shall look at that part of the story towards the end of 
this book.
 1.  
Which of these statements about the Bombay Plan is incorrect?
(a) 
It was a blueprint for India’s economic future.
(b) 
It supported state-ownership of industry.
(c) 
It was made by some leading industrialists.
(d) 
It supported strongly the idea of planning.n
2. 
Which of the following ideas did not form part of the early phase of 
India’s development policy?
(a) 
Planning   
 
 
 
(c)   
Cooperative Farming 
(b) 
Liberalisation   
 
 
(d)  
Self sufficiency  
3. 
The idea of planning in India was drawn from
 
(a)  the Bombay plan   
 
 
(c)  Gandhian vision of  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
society
 
(b)  experiences of the Soviet   
(d)  Demand by peasant
  
 
bloc countries  
 
 
 
 
organisations
 
i. 
b and d only  
 
 
 
 
iii. a and b only 
 
ii. d and c only 
 
 
 
 
iv. all the above 
EXERCISES
Credit: Shankar, “The Leap Upward”, 27 August 1961
2018-19
Politics o  Planned Development                                                                           63  
EXERCISES
  4. 
Match the following. 
 
(a)  
Charan Singh  
 
 
i.   
Industrialisation
 
(b)  
P C Mahalanobis  
 
ii.   
Zoning 
 
(c)    
Bihar Famine  
 
 
iii.   
Farmers 
 
(d)  
Verghese Kurien 
  
 
iv.   
Milk Cooperatives 
  5. 
What were the major differences in the approach towards development 
at the time of Independence? Has the debate been resolved? 
  6. 
What was the major thrust of the First Five Year Plan? In which ways 
did the Second Plan differ from the first one?
  7. 
What was the Green Revolution? Mention two positive and two 
negative consequences of the Green Revolution.
  8. 
State the main arguments in the debate that ensued between 
industrialisation and agricultural development at the time of the 
Second Five Year Plan.
  9. 
“Indian policy makers made a mistake by emphasising the role of 
state in the economy. India could have developed much better if 
private sector was allowed a free play right from the beginning”. Give 
arguments for or against this proposition.
10. 
Read the following passage and answer the questions below:
 
“In the early years of Independence, two contradictory tendencies 
were already well advanced inside the Congress party. On the one 
hand, the national party executive endorsed socialist principles 
of state ownership, regulation and control over key sectors of the 
economy in order to improve productivity and at the same time curb 
economic concentration. On the other hand, the national Congress 
government pursued liberal economic policies and incentives to 
private investment that was justified in terms of the sole criterion of 
achieving maximum increase in production. “  — FRANCINE FRANKEL
(a)  
What is the contradiction that the author is talking about? 
What would be the political implications of a contradiction like 
this?
(b)  
If the author is correct, why is it that the Congress was 
pursuing this policy? Was it related to the nature of the 
opposition parties?
(c)  
Was there also a contradiction between the central leadership 
of the Congress party and its Sate level leaders?
Politics o  Planned Development                                                                           63  
2018-19
In this chapter…
Thus far we have focussed in this book on the developments within 
the country and on domestic challenges. We now turn to the external 
challenges. Here too our leaders faced the challenge with an innovative 
response by way of the policy of non-alignment. But they also found 
themselves in conflict with neighbours. This led to three wars in 1962, 
1965 and 1971. These wars, and the external relations in general, were 
shaped by and had their impact on the politics in the country.
In this chapter we study the story of this relationship between the 
external and the internal politics by focussing on
• 
the international context that shaped India’s external relations;
• 
the operational principles that informed the country’s foreign   
 
 
policy;
• 
the history of India’s relations with China and Pakistan; and
• 
the evolution of India’s nuclear policy.
Nehru with Nkrumah 
from Ghana, Nasser 
from Egypt, Sukarno 
from Indonesia and 
Tito from Yugoslavia 
at a meeting of non-
aligned nations, New 
York, October 1960. 
These five comprised the 
core leadership of the 
Non-Aligned Movement 
(NAM).
Credit: NMML
2018-19
International conte  
India was born in a very trying and challenging international context. 
The world had witnessed a devastating war and was grappling 
with issues of reconstruction; yet another attempt to establish 
an international body was underway; many new countries were 
emerging as a result of the collapse of colonialism; and most new 
nations were trying to come to terms with the twin challenges of 
welfare and democracy. Free India’s foreign policy reflected all these 
concerns in the period immediately after Independence. Apart from 
these factors at the global level, India had its own share of concerns. 
The British government left behind the legacy of many international 
disputes; Partition created its own pressures, and the task of poverty 
alleviation was already waiting for fulfilment. This was the overall 
context in which India started participating in the world affairs as an 
independent nation-state.
As a nation born in the backdrop of the world war, India decided 
to conduct its foreign relations with an aim to respect the sovereignty 
of all other nations and to achieve security through the maintenance 
of peace. This aim finds an echo in the Directive Principles of State 
Policy. 
Just as both internal and external factors guide the behaviour of an 
individual or a family, both domestic and international environment 
influence the foreign policy of a nation. The developing countries 
lack the required resources to effectively advocate their concerns in 
the international system. So they pursue more modest goals than 
the advanced states. They focus more on peace and development in 
their own neighbourhood. Moreover, their economic and security 
dependence on the more powerful states occasionally influences 
their foreign policy. In the period immediately after the Second World 
War, many developing nations chose to support the foreign policy 
preferences of the powerful countries who were giving them aid or 
credits.  This resulted in the division of countries of the world into two 
clear camps. One was under the influence of the United States and 
its western allies and the other was under the influence of the then 
Soviet Union.  You have read about this in the book on Contemporary 
World Politics. You have read there about the experiment called the 
Non-Aligned Movement. As you also read there, the end of the Cold 
War changed the context of international relations entirely. But when 
India achieved its freedom and started framing its foreign policy, the 
4
chapter
india’s external 
relations
                  What doe  
independence consiﬆ  o ? 
It consiﬆ s fundamentally 
and basically o  foreign 
relations. T at is the te t 
o  independence. All else is 
local autonomy. Once foreign 
relations go out o  your 
hands into the charge o  
somebody else, to that e  ent 
and in that measure you are 
no  independent. 
Jawaharlal Nehru 
during a debate in the 
Constituent Assembly in 
March 1949. 
“
“
2018-19
66                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
Cold War was just beginning and the world was getting divided into 
these two camps. Did India belong to any of these two camps in global 
politics of the fifties and the sixties? Was it successful in conducting 
its foreign policy peacefully and avoiding international conflicts? 
T e Policy o  non-alignment
The Indian national movement was not an isolated process. It was a 
part of the worldwide struggle against colonialism and imperialism. 
It influenced the liberation movements of many Asian and African 
countries. Prior to India’s Independence, there were contacts between 
the nationalist leaders of India and those of other colonies, united 
as they were in their common struggle against colonialism and 
imperialism. The creation of the Indian National Army (INA) by Netaji 
Subhash Chandra Bose during the Second World War was the clearest 
manifestation of the linkages established between India and overseas 
Indians during the freedom struggle.
The foreign policy of a nation reflects the interplay of domestic 
and external factors. Therefore, the noble ideals that inspired India’s 
struggle for freedom influenced the making of its foreign policy. But 
India’s attainment of independence coincided with the beginning 
of the Cold War era. As you read in the first chapter of the book, 
Contemporary World Politics, this period was marked by the political, 
economic, and military confrontation at the global level between the 
two blocs led by the superpowers, the US and the USSR. The same 
period also witnessed developments like the establishment of the 
UN, the creation of nuclear weapons, the emergence of Communist 
The Constitutional principles
Article 51 of the Indian Constitution lays down some Directive Principles of State Policy on 
‘Promotion of international peace and security’.
“The State shall endeavour to – 
(a)  Promote international peace and security
(b)  Maintain just and honourable relations between nations
(c)  Foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organised  
 
people with one another; and
(d)  Encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration.”
How well did the Indian state live up to these principles in the first two decades after 
Independence? You may come back to this question after reading the chapter. 
It’s the fourth 
chapter and it’s Nehru 
once again! Was he a 
superman or what? 
Or has his role been 
glorified?
2018-19
India’s e  ernal relations                                                                                     67  
China, and the beginning of decolonisation. So India’s leadership had 
to pursue its national interests within the prevailing international 
context.
Nehru’s role
The first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru played a crucial role in 
setting the national agenda. He was his own foreign minister. Thus 
both as the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister, he exercised 
profound influence in the formulation and implementation of India’s 
foreign policy from 1946 to 1964. The three major objectives of 
Nehru’s foreign policy were to preserve the hard-earned sovereignty, 
protect territorial integrity, and promote rapid economic development. 
Nehru wished to achieve these objectives through the strategy of non-
alignment. There were, of course, parties and groups in the country 
that believed that India should be more friendly with the bloc led by 
the US because that bloc claimed to be pro-democracy. Among those 
who thought on these lines were leaders like Dr Ambedkar. Some 
political parties, which were opposed to communism, also wanted 
India to follow a pro-US foreign policy. These included the Bharatiya 
Jan Sangh and later the Swatantra Party.  But Nehru possessed 
considerable leeway in formulating foreign policy. 
Distance from two camps
The foreign policy of independent India vigorously pursued the dream 
of a peaceful world by advocating the policy of non-alignment, by 
reducing Cold War tensions and by contributing human resources to 
the UN peacekeeping operations. You might ask why India did not join 
either of the two camps during the Cold War era. India wanted to keep 
away from the military alliances led by US and Soviet Union against 
each other. As you read in the book, Contemporary World Politics, 
during the Cold War, the US-led North Atlantic Treaty Organisation 
(NATO) and the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact came into existence. India 
advocated non-alignment as the ideal foreign policy approach. This 
was a difficult balancing act and sometimes the balance did not appear 
perfect. In 1956 when Britain attacked Egypt over the Suez Canal 
issue, India led the world protest against this neo-colonial invasion. 
But in the same year when the USSR invaded Hungary, India did not 
join its public condemnation. Despite such a situation, by and large 
India did take an independent stand on various international issues 
and could get aid and assistance from members of both the blocs.  
While India was trying to convince the other developing countries 
about the policy of non-alignment, Pakistan joined the US-led military 
alliances. The US was not happy about India’s independent initiatives 
and the policy of non-alignment. Therefore, there was a considerable 
                 Our general 
policy is to avoid 
entanglement in power 
politics and no  to join 
any group o  powers as 
against any o her group. 
T e two leading groups 
today are the Rus ian 
bloc and the Anglo-
American bloc. We must 
be f iendly to bo h and 
ye  no  join either. Bo h 
America and Rus ia 
are e  raordinarily 
suspicious o  each o her 
as well as o  o her 
countrie . T is make  
our path diﬃ  cult 
and we may well be 
suspec ed by each o  
leaning towards the 
o her. T is canno  be 
helped.
Jawaharlal Nehru
Letter to K .P. S. 
Menon, January 
1947. 
“
“
2018-19
68                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
unease in Indo-US relations during the 1950s. The US also resented 
India’s growing partnership with the Soviet Union. 
You have studied in the last chapter, the strategy of planned 
economic development adopted by India. This policy emphasised 
import-substitution. The emphasis on developing a resource base also 
meant that export oriented growth was limited.  This development 
strategy limited India’s economic interaction with the outside world.
Afro-Asian unity
Yet, given its size, location and power potential, Nehru envisaged a 
major role for India in world affairs and especially in Asian affairs. 
His era was marked by the establishment of contacts between India 
and other newly independent states in Asia and Africa. Throughout 
the 1940s and 1950s, Nehru had been an ardent advocate of Asian 
unity. Under his leadership, India convened the Asian Relations 
Conference in March 1947, five months ahead of attaining its 
independence. India made earnest efforts for the early realisation of 
freedom of Indonesia from the Dutch colonial regime by convening 
an international conference in 1949 to support its freedom struggle. 
India was a staunch supporter of the decolonisation process and 
firmly opposed racism, especially apartheid in South Africa. The Afro-
Asian conference held in the Indonesian city of Bandung in 1955, 
commonly known as the Bandung Conference, marked the zenith of 
India’s engagement with the newly independent Asian and African 
nations. The Bandung Conference later led to the establishment 
of the NAM. The First Summit of the NAM was held in Belgrade in 
September 1961. Nehru was a co-founder of the NAM (See Chapter 1 
of Contemporary World Politics). 
Peace and conﬂ ic  with China
Unlike its relationship with Pakistan, free India began its relationship 
with China on a very friendly note. After the Chinese revolution in 
1949, India was one of the first countries to recognise the communist 
government. Nehru felt strongly for this neighbour that was coming out 
of the shadow of western domination and helped the new government 
in international fora. Some of his colleagues, like Vallabhbhai Patel, 
were worried about a possible Chinese aggression in future. But Nehru 
thought it was ‘exceedingly unlikely’ that India will face an attack 
from China. For a very long time, the Chinese border was guarded by 
para-military forces, not the army. 
The joint enunciation of Panchsheel, the Five Principles of Peaceful 
Coexistence, by the Indian Prime Minister Nehru and the Chinese 
Premier Zhou Enlai on 29 April 1954 was a step in the direction of 
stronger relationship between the two countries. Indian and Chinese 
leaders visited each other’s country and were greeted by large and 
friendly crowds. 
Did we have more 
recognition and power 
in the world when we 
were younger, poorer 
and more vulnerable 
than now? Isn’t that 
strange?
            a country without 
material, men or mone  
– the three means o  power 
– is now fast coming to be 
re ognised as the big e t 
moral power in the civilised 
world …her word liﬆ ened to 
with re pec  in the councils 
o  the great.
C. Rajagopalachari
Letter to Edwina 
Mountbatten, 1950. 
“
“
2018-19
India’s e  ernal relations                                                                                     69  
The plateau of the central Asian region called Tibet 
is one of the major issues that historically caused 
tension between India and China. From time to 
time in history, China had claimed administrative 
control over Tibet. And from time to time, Tibet was 
independent too. In 1950, China took over control 
of Tibet. Large sections of the Tibetan population 
opposed this takeover. India tried to persuade 
China to recognise Tibet’s claims for independence. 
When the Panchsheel agreement was signed 
between India and China in 1954, through one of 
its clauses about respecting each other’s territorial 
integrity and sovereignty, India conceded China’s 
claim over Tibet. The Tibetan spiritual leader Dalai Lama accompanied the Chinese Premier Zhou 
Enlai during the official Chinese visit to India in 1956. He informed Nehru about the worsening situation 
in Tibet. But China had already assured India that Tibet will be given greater autonomy than enjoyed 
by any other region of China. In 1958, there was armed uprising in Tibet against China’s occupation. 
This was suppressed by the Chinese forces. Sensing that the situation had become worse, in 1959, the 
Dalai Lama crossed over into the Indian border and sought asylum which was granted. The Chinese 
government strongly protested against this.   Over the last half century, a large number of Tibetans have 
also sought refuge in India and many other countries of the world. In India, particularly in Delhi, there 
are large settlements of Tibetan refugees. Dharmashala in Himachal Pradesh is perhaps the largest 
refuge settlement of Tibetans in India. The Dalai Lama has also made Dharmashala his home in India. 
In the 1950s and 1960s many political leaders and parties in India including the Socialist Party and the 
Jan Sangh supported the cause of Tibet’s independence.
China has created the Tibet autonomous region, which is an integral part of China. Tibetans oppose the 
Chinese claim that Tibet is part of Chinese territory. They also oppose the policy of bringing into Tibet 
more and more Chinese settlers. Tibetans dispute China’s claim that autonomy is granted to the region. 
They think that China wants to undermine the traditional religion and culture of Tibet. 
Th
l t
f th
TIBET
Credit: Homai Vyarawalla
t
d 
o 
e 
s
l 
n
e
.
d
Credit: Homai Vyarawalla
Dalai Lama enters India with his followers.
India’s e  ernal relations                                                                                     69  
2018-19
70                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
Border disputes with 
China erupted in 1960. Talks 
between Nehru and Mao Tsetung 
proved futile.
70                                                                    
Note: This 
illustration 
is not a map 
drawn to 
scale and 
should not 
be taken 
to be an 
authentic 
depiction 
of India’s 
external 
boundaries. 
2018-19
India’s e  ernal relations                                                                                     71  
V.K. Krishna 
Menon 
(1897-1974): 
Diplomat and 
minister; active 
in the Labour 
Party in UK 
between 1934-
1947; Indian High 
Commissioner in UK and later head 
of India’s delegation to UN; Rajya 
Sabha MP and later Lok Sabha MP; 
member of the Union Cabinet from 
1956; Defence Minsiter since 1957; 
considered very close to Nehru; 
resigned after the India-China war in 
1962.  
1962
Credit: R. K. Laxman
China roller 
evidence 
under 
construction.
                                                                                                                            71  
2018-19
72                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
I heard 
it from my 
grandfather. Nehru 
Ji cried in public when 
Lata Mangeshkar sang 
“Ai mere watan ke logo…” 
after the 1962 war. 
The Chinese invasion, 1962
Two developments strained this relationship. China annexed Tibet in 
1950 and thus removed a historical buffer between the two countries. 
Initially, the government of India did not oppose this openly. But as 
more information came in about the suppression of Tibetan culture, 
the Indian government grew uneasy. The Tibetan spiritual leader, the 
Dalai Lama, sought and obtained political asylum in India in 1959. 
China alleged that the government of India was allowing anti-China 
activities to take place from within India. 
A little earlier, a boundary dispute had surfaced between India 
and China. India claimed that the boundary was a matter settled in 
colonial time, but China said that any colonial decision did not apply. 
The main dispute was about the western and the eastern end of the 
long border. China claimed two areas within the Indian territory: 
Aksai-chin area in the Ladakh region of Jammu and Kashmir and 
much of the state of Arunachal Pradesh in what was then called 
NEFA (North Eastern Frontier Agency). Between 1957 and 1959, 
the Chinese occupied the Aksai-chin area and built a strategic road 
there. Despite a very long correspondence and discussion among top 
leaders, these differences could not be resolved. Several small border 
skirmishes between the armies of the two countries took place.
Do you remember the Cuban Missile Crisis in Chapter One of the 
Contemporary World Politics? While the entire world’s attention was 
on this crisis involving the two superpowers, China launched a swift 
and massive invasion in October 1962 on both the disputed regions. 
The first attack lasted one week and Chinese forces captured some 
key areas in Arunachal Pradesh. The second wave of attack came next 
month. While the Indian forces could block the Chinese advances on 
the western front in Ladakh, in the east the Chinese managed to 
advance nearly to the entry point of Assam plains. Finally, China 
declared a unilateral ceasefire and its troops withdrew to where they 
were before the invasion began. 
The China war dented India’s image at home and abroad. India 
had to approach the Americans and the British for military assistance 
to tide over the crisis. The Soviet Union remained neutral during 
the conflict. It induced a sense of national humiliation and at the 
same time strengthened a spirit of nationalism. Some of the top army 
commanders either resigned or were retired. Nehru’s close associate 
and the then Defence Minister, V. Krishna Menon, had to leave the 
cabinet. Nehru’s own stature suffered as he was severely criticised 
for his naïve assessment of the Chinese intentions and the lack of 
military preparedness. For the first time, a no-confidence motion 
against his government was moved and debated in the Lok Sabha. 
Soon thereafter, the Congress lost some key by-elections to Lok 
Sabha. The political mood of the country had begun to change.
                  Frankly ...my 
impre  ion (o  Zhou Enlai) 
was very favourable. ….the 
Chine e premier is, I believe 
a good type o  man and 
trustworthy.
C. Rajagopalachari
In a letter, December 1956
“
“
2018-19
India’s e  ernal relations                                                                                     73  
It took more than a decade for India and 
China to resume normal relations. It was 
in 1976 that full diplomatic relations were 
restored between the two countries. Atal 
Behari Vajpayee was the first top level 
leader (he was then External Affairs 
Minister) to visit China in 1979. Later, 
Rajiv Gandhi became the first Prime 
Minister after Nehru to visit China. Since 
then, the emphasis is more on trade 
relations between the two countries. In 
the book, Contemporary World Politics, 
you have already read about these 
developments.  
Fast Forward   
Sino-Indian relations since 1962
Let’s watch a Film
HAQEEQAT
A small platoon of Indian army 
is rescued by the gypsies in 
Ladakh region. The enemy has 
surrounded their post. Capt. 
Bahadur Singh and his gypsy 
girlfriend 
Kammo 
help 
the 
jawans vacate their posts. Both 
Bahadur Singh and Kammo die 
while resisting the Chinese but 
the jawans too, are overpowered 
by the enemy and lay down their 
lives for the country.
Set in the backdrop of the China 
war of 1962, this film portrays 
the soldier and his travails as its 
central theme. It pays tribute to 
the soldiers while depicting their 
plight, and the political frustration 
over the betrayal by the Chinese. 
The film uses documentary 
footage of war scenes and is 
considered as one of the early 
war films made in Hindi.
Year: 1964
Director: Chetan Anand
Actors: Dharmendra, Priya 
Rajvansh, Balraj Sahni, Jayant, 
Sudhir, Sanjay Khan, Vijay 
Anand
The Sino-Indian conflict affected the 
opposition as well. This and the growing 
rift between China and the Soviet Union 
created irreconcilable differences within 
the Communist Party of India (CPI). The 
pro-USSR faction remained within the 
CPI and moved towards closer ties with 
the Congress. The other faction was for 
sometime closer to China and was against 
any ties with the Congress. The party 
split in 1964 and the leaders of the latter 
faction formed the Communist Party of 
India (Marxist) (CPI-M). In the wake of 
the China war, many leaders of what 
became CPI (M) were arrested for being 
pro-China.
The war with China alerted the Indian 
leadership to the volatile situation in 
the Northeast region. Apart from being 
isolated and extremely underdeveloped, 
this region also presented India with 
the challenge of national integration 
and political unity. The process of its 
reorganisation began soon after the China 
war. Nagaland was granted statehood; 
Manipur and Tripura, though Union 
Territories, were given the right to elect 
their own legislative assemblies. 
2018-19
74                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
Why do 
we say India 
and Pakistan had 
a war? Leaders quarrel 
and armies fight wars. 
Most ordinary citizens 
have nothing to do 
with these.
Wars and Peace with Pakiﬆ an
In the case of Pakistan, the conflict started just after Partition over 
the dispute on Kashmir. You will read more about the dispute in 
Chapter 8. A proxy war broke out between the Indian and Pakistani 
armies in Kashmir during 1947 itself. But this did not turn into a full 
war. The issue was then referred to the UN. Pakistan soon emerged 
as a critical factor in India’s relations with the US and subsequently 
with China. 
The Kashmir conflict did not prevent cooperation between the 
governments of India and Pakistan. Both the governments worked 
together to restore the women abducted during Partition to their 
original families. A long-term dispute about the sharing of river 
waters was resolved through mediation by the World Bank. The India-
Pakistan Indus Waters Treaty was signed by Nehru and General Ayub 
Khan in 1960. Despite all ups and downs in the Indo-Pak relations, 
this treaty has worked well. 
A more serious armed conflict between the two countries began 
in 1965. As you would read in the next chapter, by then Lal Bahadur 
Shastri had taken over as the Prime Minister. In April 1965 Pakistan 
launched armed attacks in the Rann of Kutch area of Gujarat. This 
was followed by a bigger offensive in Jammu and Kashmir in August-
September. Pakistani rulers were hoping to get support from the local 
population there, but it did not happen. In order to ease the pressure 
on the Kashmir front, Shastri ordered Indian troops to launch a 
counter-offensive on the Punjab border. In a fierce battle, the Indian 
army reached close to Lahore. 
The hostilities came to an end with the UN intervention. Later, 
Indian Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri and Pakistan’s General 
Ayub Khan signed the Tashkent Agreement, brokered by the Soviet 
Union, in January 1966. Though India could inflict considerable 
military loss on Pakistan, the 1965 war added to India’s already 
difficult economic situation.  
Bangladesh war, 1971
Beginning in 1970, Pakistan faced its biggest internal crisis. The 
country’s first general election produced a split verdict – Zulfikar Ali 
Bhutto’s party emerged a winner in West Pakistan, while the Awami 
League led by Sheikh Mujib-ur Rahman swept through East Pakistan. 
The Bengali population of East Pakistan had voted to protest against 
years of being treated as second class citizens by the rulers based 
in West Pakistan. The Pakistani rulers were not willing to accept the 
democratic verdict. Nor were they ready to accept the Awami League’s 
demand for a federation. 
Instead, in early 1971, the Pakistani army arrested Sheikh Mujib 
and unleashed a reign of terror on the people of East Pakistan. In 
2018-19
India’s e  ernal relations                                                                                     75  
1965
                                                                                                                            75  
2018-19
76                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
This 
sounds like 
joining the Soviet 
bloc. Can we say that 
we were non-aligned 
even after signing this 
treaty with the Soviet 
Union?
response to this, the people started a struggle to liberate ‘Bangladesh’ 
from Pakistan. Throughout 1971, India had to bear the burden of 
about 80 lakh refugees who fled East Pakistan and took shelter in 
the neighbouring areas in India. India extended moral and material 
support to the freedom struggle in Bangladesh. Pakistan accused 
India of a conspiracy to break it up.
Support for Pakistan came from the US and China. The US-China 
rapprochement that began in the late 1960s resulted in a realignment 
of forces in Asia. Henry Kissinger, the adviser to the US President 
Richard Nixon, made a secret visit to China via Pakistan in July 
1971. In order to counter the US-Pakistan-China axis, India signed a 
20-year Treaty of Peace and Friendship with the Soviet Union in 
August 1971. This treaty assured India of Soviet support if the country 
faced any attack. 
After months of diplomatic tension and military build-up, a 
full-scale war between India and Pakistan broke out in December 
1971. Pakistani aircrafts attacked Punjab and Rajasthan, while the 
army moved on the Jammu and Kashmir front. India retaliated with 
an attack involving the air force, navy and the army on both the 
Western and the Eastern front. Welcomed and supported by the local 
population, the Indian army made rapid progress in East Pakistan. 
Within ten days the Indian army had surrounded Dhaka from three 
sides and the Pakistani army of about 90,000 had to surrender. With 
Bangladesh as a free country, India declared a unilateral ceasefire. 
Later, the signing of the Shimla Agreement between Indira Gandhi and 
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto on 3 July 1972 formalised the return of peace. 
A decisive victory in the war led to national jubiliation. Most people 
in India saw this as a moment of glory and a clear sign of India’s 
growing military prowess. As you would read in the next chapter, 
Indira Gandhi was the Prime Minister at this time. She had already 
won the Lok Sahba elections in 1971. Her personal popularity soared 
Fast Forward   Kargil Confrontation
In the early part of 1999 several points on the Indian side of the LoC in the Mashkoh, Dras, Kaksar 
and Batalik areas were occupied by forces claiming to be Mujahideens. Suspecting involvement 
of the Pakistan Army, Indian forces started reacting to this occupation. This led to a confrontation 
between the two countries.  This is known as the Kargil conflict. This conflict went on during May 
and June 1999.  By 26 July 1999, India had recovered control of many of the lost points. The Kargil 
conflict drew attention worldwide for the reason that only one year prior to that, both India and 
Pakistan had attained nuclear capability. However, this conflict remained confined only to the Kargil 
region. In Pakistan, this conflict has been the source of a major controversy as it was alleged later 
that the Prime Minister of Pakistan was kept in the dark by the Army Chief. Soon after the conflict, 
the government of Pakistan was taken over by the Pakistan Army led by the Army Chief, General 
Parvez Musharraf. 
2018-19
India’s e  ernal relations                                                                                     77  
1971
                                                                                                                            77  
2018-19
78                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
I am 
confused! Isn’t 
it all about atom 
bombs? Why don’t 
we say so?
further after the 1971 war. After the war, assembly elections in most 
States took place, bringing large majorities for the Congress party in 
many states.
India, with its limited resources, had initiated development 
planning. However, conflicts with neighbours derailed the five-year 
plans. The scarce resources were diverted to the defence sector especially 
after 1962, as India had to embark on a military modernisation drive. 
The Department of Defence Production was established in November 
1962 and the Department of Defence Supplies in November 1965. 
The Third Plan (1961-66) was affected and it was followed by three 
Annual Plans and the Fourth Plan could be initiated only in 1969. 
India’s defence expenditure increased enormously after the wars.
India’s nuclear policy
Another crucial development of this period was the first nuclear 
explosion undertaken by India in May 1974. Nehru had always put 
his faith in science and technology for rapidly building a modern 
India. A significant component of his industrialisation plans was the 
nuclear programme initiated in the late 1940s under the guidance of 
Homi J. Bhabha. India wanted to generate atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes. Nehru was against nuclear weapons. So he pleaded with 
the superpowers for comprehensive nuclear disarmament. However, 
the nuclear arsenal kept rising. When Communist China conducted 
nuclear tests in October 1964, the five nuclear weapon powers, the 
US, USSR, UK, France, and China (Taiwan then represented China)  – 
also the five Permanent Members of the UN Security Council – tried to 
impose the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) of 1968 on the rest 
of the world. India always considered the NPT as discriminatory and 
had refused to sign it. When India conducted its first nuclear test, it 
was termed as peaceful explosion. India argued that it was committed 
to the policy of using nuclear power only for peaceful purposes. 
The period when the nuclear test was conducted was a difficult 
period in domestic politics. Following the Arab-Israel War of 1973, the 
entire world was affected by the Oil Shock due to the massive hike in 
the oil prices by the Arab nations. It led to economic turmoil in India 
resulting in high inflation. As you will read in Chapter Six, many 
agitations were going on in the country around this time, including a 
nationwide railway strike. 
Although there are minor differences among political parties about 
how to conduct external relations, Indian politics is generally marked 
by a broad agreement among the parties on national integration, 
protection of international boundaries, and on questions of national 
interest. Therefore, we find that in the course of the decade of 
1962-1971, when India faced three wars, or even later, when different 
parties came to power from time to time, foreign policy has played 
only a limited role in party politics. 
2018-19
India’s e  ernal relations                                                                                     79  
Shifting alliances in world politics
As you will read in Chapter Six and also in Chapter Nine, many non-Congress governments 
came to power in the period starting 1977. This was also the time when world politics was 
changing dramatically. What did it mean for India’s external relations? 
The Janata Party government that came to power in 1977 announced that it would follow 
genuine non-alignment. This implied that the pro-Soviet tilt in the foreign policy will be 
corrected. Since then, all governments (Congress or non-Congress) have taken initiatives 
for restoring better relations with China and entering into close ties with US. In Indian 
politics and in popular mind, India’s foreign policy is always very closely linked to two 
questions. One is India’s stand vis-à-vis Pakistan and the other is Indo-US relations. In 
the post-1990 period the ruling parties have often been criticised for their pro-US foreign 
policy.  
Foreign policy is always dictated by ideas of national interest. In the period after 1990, 
Russia, though it continues to be an important friend of India, has lost its global pre-
eminence. Therefore, India’s foreign policy has shifted to a more pro-US strategy. Besides, 
the contemporary international situation is more influenced by economic interests than by 
military interests. This has also made an impact on India’s foreign policy choices. At the 
same time, Indo-Pakistan relations have witnessed many new developments during this 
period. While Kashmir continues to be the main issue between the two countries, there 
have been many efforts to restore normal relations. This means that cultural exchanges, 
movement of citizens and economic cooperation would be encouraged by both countries. 
Do you know that a train and a bus service operate between these two countries?  This 
has been a major achievement of the recent times.  But that could not avoid the near-war 
situation from emerging in 1999. Even after this setback to the peace process, efforts at 
negotiating durable peace have been going on.  
Fast Forward   India’s Nuclear Programme
India has opposed the international treaties aimed at non-proliferation since 
they were selectively applicable to the non-nuclear powers and legitimised 
the monopoly of the five nuclear weapons powers. Thus, India opposed 
the indefinite extension of the NPT in 1995 and also refused to sign the 
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). 
India conducted a series of nuclear tests in May 1998, demonstrating its 
capacity to use nuclear energy for military purposes. Pakistan soon followed, 
thereby increasing the vulnerability of the region to a nuclear exchange. The 
international community was extremely critical of the nuclear tests in the 
subcontinent and sanctions were imposed on both India and Pakistan, which 
were subsequently waived. India’s nuclear doctrine of credible minimum 
nuclear deterrence professes “no first use” and reiterates India’s commitment 
to global, verifiable and non-discriminatory nuclear disarmament leading to a 
nuclear weapons free world.
2018-19
80                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
EXERCISES
1.  Write ‘true’ or ‘false’ against each of these statements.
(a) Non-alignment allowed India to gain assistance both from USA and 
USSR.
(b) India’s relationship with her neighbours has been strained from the 
beginning.
(c) The cold war has affected the relationship between India and 
Pakistan.
(d) The treaty of Peace and Friendship in 1971 was the result of India’s 
closeness to USA.
2. Match the following 
(a) The goal of India’s foreign   
 
i. 
Tibetan spiritual leader who
 
policy in the period 1950-1964       
crossed over to India
(b)  Panchsheel                                    ii. Preservation of territorial   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
integrity, sovereignty and   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
economic development
(c)  Bandung Conference                    iii. Five principles of peaceful   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coexistence
(d)  Dalai Lama                                    iv. Led to the establishment of  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NAM
3.  Why did Nehru regard conduct of foreign relations as an essential 
indicator of independence? State any two reasons with examples to 
support your reading.
4.  “The conduct of foreign affairs is an outcome of a two-way interaction 
between domestic compulsions and prevailing international climate”. 
Take one example from India’s external relations in the 1960s to 
substantiate your answer.                 
5.  Identify any two aspects of India’s foreign policy that you would like to 
retain and two that you would like to change, if you were to become a 
decision maker. Give reasons to support your position.
6.   Write short notes on the following.
 
(a) India’s Nuclear policy
 
(b) Consensus in foreign policy matters    
                                                                   
7.  India’s foreign policy was built around the principles of peace and 
cooperation. But India fought three wars in a space of ten years 
between 1962 and 1971. Would you say that this was a failure of the 
foreign policy? Or would you say that this was a result of international 
situation? Give reasons to support your answer.
80                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
2018-19
India’s e  ernal relations                                                                                     81  
  8.  Does India’s foreign policy reflect her desire to be an important regional 
power? Argue your case with the Bangladesh war of 1971 as an 
example.
  9.  How does political leadership of a nation affect its foreign policy? 
Explain this with the help of examples from India’s foreign policy.
10.  Read this passage and answer the questions below:
 
“Broadly, non-alignment means not tying yourself off with military 
blocs….It means trying to view things, as far as possible, not from 
the military point of view, though that has to come in sometimes, 
but independently, and trying to maintain friendly relations with all 
countries.”  — JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 
 
(a) Why does Nehru want to keep off military blocs?
 
(b) Do you think that the Indo-Soviet friendship treaty violated the  
 
 
principle of non-alignment? Give reasons for your answer.
 
(c) If there were no military blocs, do you think non-alignment would   
 
have been unnecessary?
India’s e  ernal relations                                                                                     81  
2018-19
In this chapter…
In Chapter Two we read about the emergence of the Congress 
system. This system was first challenged during the 1960s. As political 
competition became more intense, the Congress found it difficult to 
retain its dominance. It faced challenges from the opposition that was 
more powerful and less divided than before. The Congress also faced 
challenges from within, as the party could no longer accommodate all 
kinds of differences. In this chapter we pick the story from where we left 
it in Chapter Two, in order to  
• 
understand how the political transition took place after Nehru;
• 
describe how the opposition unity and the Congress split posed a 
challenge to Congress dominance;
• 
explain how a new Congress led by Indira Gandhi overcame these 
challenges; and
• 
analyse how new policies and ideologies facilitated the restoration 
of the Congress system.
Originally the election 
symbol of the Congress 
was a pair of bullocks. 
This famous cartoon 
depicts the changes 
within the Congress 
leading to a head-
on confrontation in 
the 22nd year after 
Independence.
Credit: R. K. Laxman in the Times of India
2018-19
Challenge o  Political Succe  ion 
5
chapter
challenges to and 
restoration of the 
congress system
Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru passed away in May 1964. He 
had been unwell for more than a year. This had generated a lot of 
speculation about the usual question of succession: after Nehru, 
who? But in a newly independent country like India, this situation 
gave rise to a more serious question: after Nehru, what?
The second question arose from the serious doubts that many 
outsiders had about whether India’s democratic experiment will 
survive after Nehru. It was feared that like so many other newly 
independent countries, India too would not be able to manage a 
democratic succession. A failure to do so, it was feared, could lead 
to a political role for the army. Besides, there were doubts if the new 
leadership would be able to handle the multiple crises that awaited 
a solution. The 1960s were labelled as the ‘dangerous decade’ when 
When 
France 
or Canada have 
similar problems, no 
one talks about failure 
or disintegration. Why are 
we under this constant 
suspicion?
2018-19
84                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
unresolved problems like poverty, inequality, communal and regional 
divisions etc. could lead to a failure of the democratic project or even 
the disintegration of the country.
From Nehru to Shastri
The ease with which the succession after Nehru took place proved all 
the critics wrong. When Nehru passed away, K. Kamraj, the president 
of the Congress party consulted party leaders and Congress members 
of Parliament and found that there was a consensus in favour of Lal 
Bahadur Shastri. He was unanimously chosen as the leader of the 
Congress parliamentary party and thus  became the country’s next 
Prime Minister.  Shastri was a non-controversial leader from Uttar 
Pradesh who had been a Minister in Nehru’s cabinet for many years. 
Nehru had come to depend a lot on him in his last year. He was 
known for his simplicity and his commitment to  principles. Earlier 
he had resigned from the position of Railway Minister accepting moral 
responsibility for a major railway accident. 
Shastri was the country’s Prime Minister from 1964 to 1966. 
During Shastri’s brief Prime Ministership, the country faced two 
major challenges.  While India was still recovering from the economic 
implications of the war with China, failed monsoons, drought and 
serious food crisis presented a grave challenge. As discussed in the 
previous chapter, the country also faced a war with Pakistan in 
1965. Shastri’s famous slogan ‘Jai Jawan Jai Kisan’, symbolised the 
country’s resolve to face both these challenges. 
Shastri’s Prime Ministership came to an abrupt end on 10 January 
1966, when he suddenly expired in Tashkent, then in USSR and 
currently the capital of Uzbekistan. He was there to discuss and sign 
an agreement with Muhammad Ayub Khan, the then President of 
Pakistan, to end the war. 
From Shastri to Indira Gandhi
Thus the Congress faced the challenge of political succession for the 
second time in two years.  This time there was an intense competition 
between Morarji Desai and Indira Gandhi. Morarji Desai had earlier 
served as Chief Minister of Bombay state (today’s Maharashtra and 
Gujarat) and also as a Minister at the centre.  Indira Gandhi, the 
daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru, had been Congress President in the 
past and had also been Union Minister for Information in the Shastri 
cabinet. This time the senior leaders in the party decided to back 
Indira Gandhi, but the decision was not unanimous.  The contest 
was resolved through a secret ballot among Congress MPs.  Indira 
Gandhi defeated Morarji Desai by securing the support of more than 
two-thirds of the party’s MPs.  A peaceful transition of power, despite 
intense competition for leadership, was seen as a sign of maturity of 
India’s democracy.
                  …new Prime 
Miniﬆ er o  India, in spite 
o  all forebodings, had been 
named with more dispatch, 
and much more dignity, 
than was the new Prime 
Miniﬆ er o  Britain.
Editorial in The Guardian, 
London, 3 June 1964, 
comparing the political 
succession after Nehru 
with the succession drama 
after Harold Macmillan in 
Britain.  
Lal Bahadur 
Shastri 
(1904-1966): 
Prime Minister of 
India; participated 
in the freedom 
movement since 
1930; minister 
in UP cabinet; 
General Secretary 
of Congress; 
Minister in Union 
Cabinet from 
1951 to 1956 when 
he resigned taking 
responsibility for 
the railway accident 
and later from 1957 
to 1964; coined the 
famous slogan ‘Jai 
Jawan-Jai Kisan’.
“
“
2018-19
Challenge  to and Re toration o  the Congre   System                                           85  
It took some time before the new Prime Minister could settle down. 
While Indira Gandhi had been politically active for very long, she had 
served as a minister under Lal Bahadur Shastri only for a short period. 
The senior Congress leaders may have supported Indira Gandhi in the 
belief that her administrative and political inexperience would compel 
her to be dependent on them for support and guidance.  Within a 
year of becoming Prime Minister, Indira Gandhi had to lead the party 
in a Lok Sabha election. Around this time, the economic situation in 
the country had further deteriorated, adding to her problems. Faced 
with these difficulties, she set out to gain control over the party and 
to demonstrate her leadership skills. 
Indira Gandhi (1917-1984): Prime Minister of India from 1966 to 1977 
and 1980 to 1984; daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru; participated in the 
freedom struggle as a young Congress worker; Congress President 
in 1958; minister in Shastri’s cabinet from 1964-66; led the Congress 
party to victory in 1967, 1971 and 1980 general elections; credited with 
the slogan ‘garibi hatao’, victory in 1971 war and for policy initiatives 
like abolition of Privy Purse, nationalisation of banks, nuclear test and 
environmental protection; assassinated on 31 October 1984.   
Credit: R. K. Laxman in The Times of India, 18 January 1966
2018-19
86                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
Fourth General Elec ions, 1967 
The year 1967 is considered a landmark year in India’s political and 
electoral history. In Chapter Two you read about how the Congress 
party was the dominant political force throughout the country from 
1952 onwards. This trend was to undergo significant changes with 
the 1967 elections. 
Context of the elections
In the years leading up to the fourth general elections, the country 
witnessed major changes. Two Prime Ministers had died in quick 
succession, and the new Prime Minister, who was being seen as a 
political novice, had been in office for less than a year.  You will recall 
from the discussion in Chapter Three and in the previous section of 
this chapter that the period was fraught with grave economic crisis 
resulting from successive failure of monsoons, widespread drought, 
It must have 
been difficult for 
her – one woman in a 
world dominated by men. 
Why don’t we have more 
women in positions 
like that?
Credit: Raghu Rai
2018-19
Challenge  to and Re toration o  the Congre   System                                           87  
decline in agricultural production, 
serious food shortage, depletion of 
foreign exchange reserves, drop in 
industrial production and exports, 
combined with a sharp rise in 
military expenditure and diversion 
of resources from planning and 
economic development.  One of the 
first decisions of the Indira Gandhi 
government was to devaluate the 
Indian rupee, under what was seen to 
be pressure from the US. Earlier one 
US dollar could be purchased for  less 
than Rs. 5; after devaluation it cost 
more than Rs. 7. 
The economic situation triggered 
off price rise. People started protesting 
against the increase in prices of 
essential commodities, food scarcity, 
growing 
unemployment 
and 
the 
overall economic condition in the 
country. Bandhs and hartals were 
called frequently across the country. 
The government saw the protests as 
a law and order problem and not as 
expressions of people’s problems. This 
further increased public bitterness 
and reinforced popular unrest. 
The 
communist 
and 
socialist 
parties 
launched 
struggles 
for 
greater equality. You will read in the 
next chapter about how a group of 
communists who separated from the 
Communist Party of India (Marxist) 
to form the Communist Party of India 
(Marxist-Leninist) led armed agrarian 
struggles 
and 
organised 
peasant 
agitations. This period also witnessed 
some of the worst Hindu-Muslim riots 
since Independence.
Non-Congressism
This 
situation 
could 
not 
have 
remained isolated from party politics 
in the country. Opposition parties 
were in the forefront of organising 
public protests and pressurising the 
Elec ion in a Rajasthan Village
This is a story about 1967 
assembly 
elections. 
In 
the Chomu constituency, 
the main parties in the 
fray were Congress and 
the Swatantra   party. 
But village Devisar had 
its 
own 
local 
political 
dynamics and it got mixed 
up with the competition 
between the two parties. 
Sher Singh, traditionally 
dominated village politics, 
but gradually his nephew, 
Bhim Singh was emerging 
as 
the 
more 
popular 
leader and rival. Though both were Rajputs, Bhim 
Singh cultivated the support of many non-Rajputs in 
the village by attending to their requirements after 
becoming the panchayat Pradhan. So, he struck a new 
equation—the alliance of Rajputs and non-Rajputs.  
He proved to be more adept in building alliances 
across the village by supporting candidates in other 
villages for the posts of village Pradhan. In fact, he took 
an initiative and took a delegation to the State Chief 
Minister and Congress leader Mohan Lal Sukhadia 
for pressing the name of one of his friends from a 
nearby village as Congress candidate in the Assembly 
election. When Sukhadia convinced him of some other 
name, Bhim Singh, in turn, convinced many others 
that they should work for the party candidate. Bhim 
Singh knew that if the party candidate won from this 
constituency, that candidate would become a minister 
and thus, he would have direct contacts with a minister 
for the first time!
Sher Singh had no option but to work for the Swatantra 
candidate, who was a jagirdar. He kept telling people 
that the jagirdar would help build the village school and 
use his resources for the development of the locality. 
At least in Devisar village, the Assembly election 
had turned into a factional fight between uncle and 
nephew.  
Based on Anand Chakravarti, ‘A Village in Chomu 
Assembly Constituency in Rajasthan.’
2018-19
88                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
government. Parties opposed to 
the Congress realised that the 
division of their votes kept the 
Congress in power. Thus parties 
that were entirely different and 
disparate in their programmes 
and ideology got together to 
form anti-Congress fronts in 
some states and entered into 
electoral adjustments of sharing 
seats in others. They felt that the 
inexperience of Indira Gandhi 
and the internal factionalism 
within the Congress provided 
them an opportunity to topple 
the Congress.  The socialist 
leader 
Ram 
Manohar 
Lohia 
gave this strategy the name 
of ‘non-Congressism’. He also 
produced a theoretical argument 
in its defence: Congress rule was 
undemocratic and opposed to the 
interests of ordinary poor people; 
therefore, the coming together 
of 
the 
non-Congress 
parties 
was  necessary for reclaiming 
democracy for the people. 
Electoral verdict
It was in this context of heightened popular 
discontent and the polarisation of political forces 
that the fourth general elections to the Lok Sabha 
and State Assemblies were held in February 1967. 
The Congress was facing the electorate for the first 
time without Nehru. 
The results jolted the Congress at both the 
national and state levels. Many contemporary 
political observers described the election results as 
a ‘political earthquake’.The Congress did manage 
to get a majority in the Lok Sabha, but with its 
lowest tally of seats and share of votes since 1952. 
Half the ministers in Indira Gandhi’s cabinet were 
defeated. The political stalwarts who lost in their 
constituencies included Kamaraj in Tamil Nadu, 
S.K. Patil in Maharashtra, Atulya Ghosh in West 
Bengal and K. B. Sahay in Bihar.
               ...in India, as 
pre ent trends continue… 
maintenance o  an ordered 
structure o  socie y is going 
to slip out o  reach o  an 
ordered structure o  civil 
government and the army 
will be only alternative 
source o  authority 
and order. …the great 
e periment o  developing 
India within a democratic 
f amework has failed.
Neville Maxwell
‘India’s Disintegrating 
Democracy’ an article 
published in the London 
Times, 1967. 
“
“
C. Natarajan Annadurai 
(1909-1969): Chief Minister 
of Madras (Tamil Nadu) 
from 1967; a journalist, 
popular writer and orator; 
initially associated with the 
Justice Party in Madras 
province; later joined Dravid 
Kazagham (1934); formed 
DMK as a political party in 
1949; a proponent of Dravid 
culture, he was opposed to 
imposition of Hindi and led 
the anti-Hindi agitations; 
supporter of greater 
autonomy to States.
Ram Manohar 
Lohia (1910-1967): 
Socialist leader and 
thinker; freedom 
fighter and among 
the founders of the 
Congress Socialist 
Party; after the 
split in the parent 
party, the leader of the Socialist Party 
and later the Samyukta Socialist 
Party; Member, Lok Sabha, 1963-
67; founder editor of Mankind and 
Jan, known for original contribution 
to a non-European socialist theory; 
as political leader, best known for 
sharp attacks on Nehru, strategy 
of non-Congressism,  advocacy of 
reservation for backward castes and 
opposition to English.
2018-19
Challenge  to and Re toration o  the Congre   System                                           89  
Is non-Congressism 
relevant today? Can it be 
applied against Left Front in 
today’s West Bengal? 
Note: This 
illustration is not 
a map drawn to 
scale and should 
not be taken to 
be an authentic 
depiction of 
India’s external 
boundaries. 
2018-19
90                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
The dramatic nature of the political change would be more 
apparent to you at the State level. The Congress lost majority in as 
many as seven States.  In two other States defections prevented it 
from forming a government. These nine States where the Congress 
lost power were spread across the country – Punjab, Haryana, Uttar 
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Orissa, Madras and 
Kerala. In Madras State (now called Tamil Nadu), a regional party — 
the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) – came to power by securing 
a clear majority.  The DMK won power after having led a massive 
anti-Hindi agitation by students against the centre on the issue of 
imposition of Hindi as the official language. This was the first time any 
non-Congress party had secured a majority of its own in any State. In 
the other eight States, coalition governments consisting of different 
non-Congress parties were formed. A popular saying was that one 
could take a train from Delhi to Howrah and not pass through a 
single Congress ruled State. It was a strange feeling for those who 
were used to seeing the Congress in power. So, was the domination 
of the Congress over? 
Coalitions 
The elections of 1967 brought into picture the phenomenon of 
coalitions.  Since no single party had got majority, various non-
Congress parties came together to form joint legislative parties (called 
Samyukt Vidhayak Dal in Hindi) that supported non-Congress 
governments. That is why these governments came to be described 
as SVD governments.  In most of these cases the coalition partners 
were  ideologically incongruent. The SVD government in Bihar, for 
instance, included the two socialist parties – SSP and the PSP – along 
with the CPI on the left and Jana Sangh on the right. In Punjab it 
was called the ‘Popular United Front’ and comprised the two rival 
Akali parties at that time – Sant group and the Master group – with 
both the communist parties – the CPI and the CPI(M), the SSP, the 
Republican Party and the Bharatiya Jana Sangh.  
A cartoonist’s reading of Charan Singh’s attempt to build a United Front of non-communist 
parties in 1974
Credit: Kutty
What’s 
so unusual in 
hung assemblies 
and coalition 
governments? We 
see them all 
the time.
2018-19
Challenge  to and Re toration o  the Congre   System                                           91  
Defection
Another important feature of the politics after the 1967 election was the 
role played by defections in  the making and unmaking of governments 
in the States. Defection means an elected representative leaves the 
party on whose symbol he/she was elected and joins another party. 
After the 1967 general election, the breakaway Congress legislators 
played an important role in installing non-Congress governments in 
three States - Haryana, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh.  The 
constant realignments and shifting political loyalties in this period 
gave rise to the expression ‘Aya Ram, Gaya Ram’. 
 The story of ‘Aya Ram, Gaya Ram’
The expression ‘aya ram, gaya ram’ became 
popular in the political vocabulary in India to 
describe the practice of frequent floor-crossing 
by legislators.  Literally translated the terms 
meant, Ram came and Ram went.  The expression 
originated in an amazing feat of floor crossing 
achieved by Gaya Lal, an MLA in Haryana, in 
1967. He  changed his party thrice in a fortnight, 
from Congress to United Front, back to Congress 
and then within nine hours to United Front again!  It is said that when Gaya Lal declared his 
intention to quit the United Front and join the Congress, the Congress leader, Rao Birendra Singh 
brought him to Chandigarh press and declared “Gaya Ram was now Aya Ram”. 
Gaya Lal’s feat was immortalised in the phrase “Aya Ram, Gaya Ram” which became the subject 
of numerous jokes and cartoons. Later, the Constitution was amended to prevent defections.
m . 
 
n 
t,
ss 
Split in the Congre   
We saw that after the 1967 elections, the 
Congress retained power at the Centre but with 
a reduced majority and lost power in many 
States. More importantly, the results proved that 
the Congress could be defeated at the elections. 
But there was no substitute as yet. Most non-
Congress coalition governments in the States did 
not survive for long. They lost majority, and either 
new combinations were formed or President’s 
rule had to be imposed. 
Indira vs. the ‘Syndicate’
The real challenge to Indira Gandhi came not 
from the opposition but from within her own 
K. Kamaraj 
(1903-1975): Freedom 
fighter and Congress 
President; Chief 
Minister of Madras 
(Tamil Nadu); having 
suffered educational 
deprivation, made 
efforts to spread 
education in Madras 
province; introduced mid-day meal 
scheme for schoolchildren; in 1963 he 
proposed that all senior Congressmen 
should resign from office to make way 
for younger party workers—this proposal 
is famous as the ‘Kamaraj plan.’
2018-19
92                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
The Congress ‘Syndicate’ 
Syndicate was the informal name given to a group of Congress 
leaders who were in control of the party’s organisation. It was led by 
K. Kamraj, former Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu and then the president 
of the Congress party. It included powerful State leaders like S. K. 
Patil of Bombay city (later named as Mumbai), S. Nijalingappa of 
Mysore (later Karnataka), N. Sanjeeva Reddy of Andhra Pradesh 
and Atulya Ghosh of West Bengal. Both Lal Bahadur Shastri and 
later Indira Gandhi owed their position to the support received from 
the Syndicate. This group had a decisive say in Indira Gandhi’s first 
Council of Ministers and also in policy formulation and implementation. 
After the Congress split the leaders of the syndicate and those owing 
allegiance to them  stayed with the Congress (O). Since it was Indira 
Gandhi’s Congress (R) that won the test of popularity, all these big 
and powerful men of Indian politics lost their power and prestige 
after 1971.
party.  She had to deal with 
the ‘syndicate’, a group of 
powerful 
and 
influential 
leaders 
from 
within 
the 
Congress.  The Syndicate 
had played a role in  the 
installation of Indira Gandhi as the Prime Minister by 
ensuring her election as the leader of the parliamentary 
party. These leaders expected Indira Gandhi to follow their 
advise. Gradually, however, Indira Gandhi attempted to 
assert her position within the government and the party. 
She chose her trusted group of advisers from outside 
the party. Slowly and carefully, she sidelined 
the Syndicate. 
Indira Gandhi thus faced two challenges. 
She needed to build her independence from the 
Syndicate.  She also needed to work towards 
regaining the ground that the Congress had 
lost in the 1967 elections. Indira Gandhi 
adopted a very bold strategy. She converted 
a simple power struggle into an ideological 
struggle. She launched a series of initiatives to 
give the government policy a Left orientation. 
She got the Congress Working Committee to 
adopt a Ten Point Programme in May 1967. 
This programme included social control of 
banks, nationalisation of General Insurance, 
ceiling on urban property and income, 
Karpoori Thakur 
(1924-1988): Chief Minister 
of Bihar between December 
1970 and June 1971 and 
again between June 1977 
and April 1979; Freedom 
Fighter and socialist 
leader; active in labour 
and peasant movements; 
staunch follower of Lohia; 
participated in the movement led by JP; known 
for his decision to introduce reservations 
for the backward classes in Bihar during his 
second Chief Ministership; strong opponent of 
the use of English Language.
S. Nijalingappa 
(1902-2000): 
Senior Congress 
leader; Member 
of Constituent 
Assembly; member 
of Lok Sabha; Chief 
Minister of the then 
Mysore (Karnataka) 
State; regarded as 
the maker of modern 
Karnataka; President 
of Congress during 
1968-71.
So, 
there is nothing 
new about State 
level leaders being 
the king-makers at 
the centre. I thought 
it happened only in 
the 1990s.
2018-19
Challenge  to and Re toration o  the Congre   System                                           93  
public distribution of food grains, land reforms and 
provision of house sites to the rural poor. While the 
‘syndicate’ leaders formally approved this Left-wing 
programme, they had serious reservations about 
the same.  
Presidential election, 1969
The factional rivalry between the Syndicate and Indira 
Gandhi came in the open in 1969. Following President 
Zakir Hussain’s death, the post of  President of the 
India fell vacant that year. Despite Mrs Gandhi’s 
reservations the ‘syndicate’ managed to nominate 
her long time opponent and then speaker of the Lok 
Sabha, N. Sanjeeva Reddy, as the official Congress 
candidate for the ensuing Presidential elections. 
Indira Gandhi retaliated by encouraging the then 
Vice-President, V.V. Giri, to file his nomination as 
an independent candidate.  She also announced 
several big and popular policy measures like the 
nationalisation of fourteen leading private banks 
and the abolition of the ‘privy purse’ or the special 
privileges given to former princes. Morarji Desai was 
the Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister. 
“The Left Hook” was published after the victory of V.V. Giri, (the boxer with the garland) 
over the nominee of the Syndicate, represented here by Nijalingappa (on his knees).
Credit: R. K. Laxman in The TImes of India, 21 August 1969
V.V. Giri 
(1894-1980): 
President of 
India from 
1969 to 1974; 
Congress 
worker and 
labour leader 
from Andhra 
Pradesh; Indian 
High Commissioner to Ceylon 
(Sri Lanka); Labour Minister in 
Union cabinet; Governor of  U.P., 
Kerala, Mysore (Karnataka); 
Vice-President (1967-1969) and 
acting President after the death of 
President Zakir Hussain; resigned 
and contested presidential election 
as independent candidate; received 
support from Indira Gandhi for his 
election as President. 
2018-19
94                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
                Hiﬆ ory … is 
reple e with instance  o  
the tragedy that overtake  
democracy w en a leader 
w o has risen to power on 
the cre t o  a popular wave 
or with the sup ort o  a 
democratic organisation 
be ome  a vic im o  
political narcis ism 
and is eg ed on by a 
co erie o  unscrupulous 
s cophants…...
S Nijalingappa
Letter to Indira Gandhi 
expelling her from the 
party, 
11 
November 
1969.
“
“
On both the above issues serious differences emerged between him 
and the Prime Minister resulting in Desai leaving the government. 
Congress had seen differences of this kind in the past. But 
this time both the parties wanted a showdown which took place 
during the Presidential elections.  The then Congress President 
S. Nijalingappa issued a ‘whip’ asking all the Congress MPs and MLAs 
to vote in favour of Sanjeeva Reddy, the official candidate of the party. 
Supporters of Indira Gandhi requisitioned a special meeting of the 
AICC (that is why this faction came to be known as ‘requisitionists’) 
but this was refused.  After silently supporting V.V. Giri, the Prime 
Minister openly called for a ‘conscience vote’ which meant that the 
MPs and MLAs from the Congress should be free to vote the way they 
want.  The election ultimately resulted in the victory of V.V. Giri, the 
independent candidate, and the defeat of Sanjeeva Reddy, the official 
Congress candidate. 
The defeat of the official Congress candidate formalised the split 
in the party. The Congress President expelled the Prime Minister 
from the party; she claimed that her group was the real Congress. By 
November 1969, the Congress group led by the ‘syndicate’ came to be 
referred to as the Congress (Organisation) and the group led by Indira 
Gandhi came to be called the Congress (Requisitionists).  These two 
parties were also described as Old Congress and New Congress. Indira 
Gandhi projected the split as an ideological divide between socialists 
and conservatives, between the pro-poor and the pro-rich. 
Abolition of Privy Purse 
In Chapter One you have read about the integration of the Princely States. This integration was 
preceded by an assurance that after the dissolution of princely rule,  the then rulers’ families 
would be allowed to retain certain private property, and given a grant in heredity or government 
allowance, measured on the basis of the extent, revenue and potential of the merging state. 
This grant was called the privy purse. At the time of accession, there was little criticism of these 
privileges since integration and consolidation was the primary aim.  
Yet, hereditary privileges were not consonant with the principles of equality and social and economic 
justice laid down in the Constitution of India.  Nehru had expressed his dissatisfaction over the 
matter time and again. Following the 1967 elections, Indira Gandhi supported the demand that the 
government should abolish privy purses. Morarji Desai, however, called the move morally wrong 
and amounting to a ‘breach of faith with the princes’.  
The government tried to bring a Constitutional amendment in 1970, but it was not passed in Rajya 
Sabha. It then issued an ordinance which was struck down by the Supreme Court. Indira Gandhi 
made this into a major election issue in 1971 and got a lot of public support. Following its massive 
victory in the 1971 election, the Constitution was amended to remove legal obstacles for abolition 
of ‘privy purse’.  
2018-19
Challenge  to and Re toration o  the Congre   System                                           95  
A cartoonist’s impression of the leadership rivalry in the Congress Party in 1969. 
Credit: Vijayan, Shankar’s Weekly
20 July 1969
2018-19
96                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
T e 1971 Elec ion and Re toration o  Congre  
The split in the Congress reduced Indira Gandhi Government to a 
minority. Yet her government continued in office with the issue-based 
support of a few other parties including the Communist Party of India 
and the DMK. During this period the government made conscious 
attempts to project its socialist credentials.  This was also a phase  when 
Indira Gandhi vigorously campaigned for implementing the existing 
land reform laws and  undertook  further land ceiling legislation.  In 
order to end her dependence on other political parties, strengthen 
her party’s position in the Parliament, and seek a popular mandate 
for her programmes, Indira Gandhi’s government recommended the 
dissolution of the Lok Sabha in December 1970. This was another 
surprising and bold move.  The fifth general election to Lok Sabha 
were held in February 1971.  
The contest
The electoral contest appeared to be loaded against Congress(R). 
After all, the new Congress was just one faction of an already weak 
party. Everyone believed that the real organisational strength of the 
Congress party was under the command of Congress(O). To make 
matters worse for Indira Gandhi, all the major non-communist, non-
Congress opposition parties formed an electoral alliance known as 
the Grand Alliance. The SSP, PSP, Bharatiya Jana Sangh, Swatantra 
Party and the Bharatiya Kranti Dal came together under this umbrella. 
The ruling party had an alliance with the CPI.
Yet the new Congress had something that its big opponents 
lacked – it had an issue, an agenda and a positive slogan. The Grand 
Alliance did not have a coherent political programme. Indira Gandhi 
said that the opposition alliance had only one common programme: 
Indira Hatao (Remove Indira).  In contrast to this, she put forward 
a positive programme captured in the famous slogan: Garibi Hatao 
(Remove Poverty). She focused on the growth of the public sector, 
imposition of ceiling on rural land holdings and urban property, 
removal of disparities in income and opportunity, and abolition of 
princely privileges.  Through garibi hatao Indira Gandhi tried to 
generate a support base among the disadvantaged, especially among 
the landless labourers, Dalits and Adivasis, minorities, women and 
the unemployed youth. The slogan of garibi hatao and the programmes 
that followed it were part of Indira Gandhi’s political strategy of 
building an independent nationwide political support base. 
Almost four 
decades after giving the 
slogan of Garibi Hatao, we 
still have much poverty 
around! Was the slogan 
only an election 
gimmick?
2018-19
Challenge  to and Re toration o  the Congre   System                                           97  
The outcome and after
The results of the Lok Sabha elections of 1971, were as dramatic 
as was the decision to hold these elections.  The Congress(R)-CPI 
alliance won more seats and votes than the Congress had ever won 
in the first four general elections. The combine won 375 seats in Lok 
Sabha and secured 48.4 per cent votes. Indira Gandhi’s Congress(R) 
won 352 seats with about 44 per cent of the popular votes on its own. 
Contrast this with the performance of the Congress(O): the party 
with so many stalwarts could get less than one-fourth of the votes 
secured by Indira Gandhi’s party and win merely 16 seats. With this 
the Congress party led by Indira Gandhi established its claim to being 
the ‘real’ Congress and restored to it the dominant position in Indian 
politics. The Grand Alliance of the opposition proved a grand failure. 
Their combined tally of seats was less than 40.
“The Grand Finish” is how a cartoonist interpreted the outcome of the 1971 elections. 
Players on the ground are the then leading opposition figures. 
Credit: R. K. Laxman in The Times of India
2018-19
98                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
Soon after the 1971 Lok Sabha 
elections, a major political and military 
crisis broke out in East Pakistan (now 
Bangladesh). As you have read in Chapter 
Four, the 1971 elections were followed by 
the crisis in East Pakistan and the Indo-
Pak war leading to the establishment 
of Bangladesh. These events added to 
the popularity of Indira Gandhi. Even 
the 
opposition 
leaders 
admired 
her 
statesmanship. Her party swept through all 
the State Assembly elections held in 1972. 
She was seen not only as the protector of 
the poor and the underprivileged, but also 
a strong nationalist leader. The opposition 
to her, either within the party or outside of 
it, simply did not matter.
With two successive election victories, 
one at the centre and other at the State 
level, the dominance of the Congress was 
restored. The Congress was now in power in almost all the States.  It 
was also popular across different social sections. Within a span of four 
years, Indira Gandhi had warded off the challenge to her leadership 
and to the dominant position of the Congress  party. 
The new manner of choosing CMs by Indira Gandhi inspired this cartoon.
The cup
 that cheers
Credit: Kutty
Credit: R. K. Laxman in the Times of India
2018-19
Challenge  to and Re toration o  the Congre   System                                           99  
Restoration? 
But does it mean that the Congress system 
was restored? What Indira Gandhi had 
done was not a revival of the old Congress 
party. In many ways she had re-invented 
the party. The party occupied a similar 
position in terms of its popularity as in 
the past. But it was a different kind of a 
party. It relied entirely on the popularity 
of the supreme leader. It had a somewhat 
weak 
organisational 
structure. 
This 
Congress party now did not have many 
factions, thus it could not accommodate 
all kinds of opinions and interests.  While 
it won elections, it depended more on 
some social groups: the poor, the women, 
Dalits, Adivasis and the minorities. This 
was a new Congress that had emerged. 
Thus Indira Gandhi restored the Congress 
system by changing the nature of the 
Congress system itself. 
Despite being more popular, the new 
Congress did not have the kind of capacity 
to absorb all tensions and conflicts that 
the Congress system was known for.  While 
the Congress consolidated its position 
and Indira Gandhi assumed a position 
of unprecedented political authority, 
the spaces for democratic expression of 
people’s aspirations actually shrank. The 
popular unrest and mobilisation around 
issues of development and economic 
deprivation continued to grow. In the 
next chapter you will read about how this 
led to a political crisis that threatened 
the very existence of constitutional 
democracy in the country.
That 
is like 
changing the top 
and legs of a table 
and still calling it the 
old table! What was 
common between the 
Old and the New 
Congress?
Let’s watch a Film
ZANJEER
Vijay, a young police officer is 
framed in false charges and sent 
to jail while fighting gangsters. 
Released from jail, Vijay is 
determined to take revenge. He 
fights all odds and vanquishes 
the villains. Even while he is 
engaged in taking revenge, Vijay 
is fighting the anti-social element 
and gets the tacit support of many 
others from within the system. 
This film portrayed the erosion 
of moral values and the deep 
frustrations arising from that 
quite forcefully. It represents the 
indifference of the system and 
the harsh and volcanic eruption 
of protest through the anger of 
Vijay. The film set the trend of 
what was later to be known as 
the ‘angry young man’ of the 
seventies. 
Year: 1973
Director: Prakash Mehra
Screenplay: Javed Akhtar
Cast: Amitabh Bachchan, Ajit, 
Jaya Bhaduri, Pran 
2018-19
100                                                                   Politics in India since Independence
EXERCISES
1.  Which of these statements about the 1967 elections is/are correct?
  
(a)  Congress won the Lok Sabha elections but lost the Assembly   
 
 
elections in many states. 
  
 (b)  Congress lost both Lok Sabha and Assembly elections. 
  
 (c)  Congress lost majority in the Lok Sabha but formed a coalition  
 
 
government with the support of some other parties. 
  
(d)  Congress retained power at the Centre with an increased majority.
2.  Match the  following:
  
(a)  Syndicate  
 
 
 
 
 
i.  An elected representative   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
leaving the party on whose  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ticket s/he has been elected 
  
(b)  Defection  
 
 
 
 
 
ii.  A catchy phrase that attracts  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
public attention
  
(c)  Slogan  
 
 
 
 
 
 
iii.  parties  with different   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ideological position coming  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
together to oppose Congress  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and its policies                                            
  
(d)  Anti-Congressism  
 
 
 
 iv. A group of powerful  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and influential leaders                                                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
within the Congress
3.  Whom would you identify with the following slogans/phrases?
  
(a)  Jai Jawan, Jai Kisan
  
(b)  Indira Hatao!
  
(c)  Garibi Hatao!
4.  Which of the following statement about the Grand Alliance of 1971 is 
correct?
  
The Grand Alliance …..
  
 (a)  was formed by non-Communist, non-Congress parties. 
  
(b)  had a clear political and ideological programme.
  
(c)  was formed by all non-Congress parties.
5.  How should a political party resolve its internal differences? Here are 
some suggestions. Think of each and list out their advantages and 
shortcomings. 
  
(a)  Follow the footsteps of the party president
  
(b)  Listen to the majority group
  
(c)  Secret ballot voting on every issue
  
(d)  Consult the senior and experienced leaders of the party
6.  State which of these were reasons for  the defeat of the Congress in 
1967. Give reasons for your answer.
  
 (a) The absence of a charismatic leader in the Congress party
  
(b) Split within the Congress party
  
(c) Increased mobilisation of regional, ethnic and communal groups
100                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
2018-19
Challenge  to and Re toration o  the Congre   System                                           101  
  
(d) Increasing unity among non-Congress parties
  
(e) Internal differences within the Congress party
  7.  What were the factors which led to the popularity of Indira Gandhi’s 
Government in the early 1970s?
 8. What does the term ‘syndicate’ mean in the context of the Congress 
party of the sixties? What role did the Syndicate play in the Congress 
party?
 9.  Discuss the major issue which led to the formal split of the Congress 
Party in 1969.
10.  Read the passage and answer the questions below:
  
…Indira Gandhi changed the Congress into highly cerntalised and 
undemocratic party organisation, from the earlier federal, democratic 
and ideological formation that Nehru had led…..But this… could not 
have happened had not Indira Gandhi changed the entire nature of 
politics. This new, populist politics turned political ideology ……. into 
a mere electoral discourse, use of various slogans not meant to be 
translated into government policies…… During its great electoral 
victories in early 1970s, amidst the celebration, the Congress party as a 
political organisation died…..  — SUDIPTA KAVIRAJ
  
(a) What according to the author is the difference between the  
 
 
 
strategies of Nehru and Indira Gandhi?
  
(b) Why does the author say that the Congress party ‘died’ in the   
 
 
seventies?
  
(c) In what way, did  the change in the Congress party affect other  
 
 
political parties also? 
  
LET US DO IT TOGETHER 
•  
Make a list of slogans coined by political parties.
• 
 Do you see any similarities between advertisements and 
manifestoes, slogans and advertisements of political parties?
• 
Have a discussion on how price rise affects the political fortunes of 
the political parties. 
Challenge  to and Re toration o  the Congre   System                                           101  
2018-19
In this chapter…
We have seen in the last chapter that the Congress recovered after 
1971, but was not the same kind of party. The difference became 
clear in a series of events between 1973 and 1975 that brought new 
challenges to India’s democratic politics and the institutional balance 
sought by the Constitution. These developments led to the imposition of 
‘emergency’ in June 1975. Normally, we would associate ‘emergency’ 
with war and aggression or with natural disaster. But this ‘emergency’ 
was imposed because of the perceived threat of internal disturbance. 
The Emergency ended as dramatically as it had begun, resulting in a 
defeat of the Congress in the Lok Sabha elections of 1977. 
In this chapter we focus on this crucial phase in the history of democracy 
in India and ask some questions that have remained controversial after 
all these years.
• 
Why was Emergency imposed? Was it necessary?
• 
What did the imposition of Emergency mean in practice?
• 
What were the consequences of Emergency on party politics?
• 
What are the lessons of Emergency for Indian democracy?
The editorial page of 
‘Nai Dunia’ of 27 June 
1975  was like any other 
day, except that the 
space for editorial was 
left blank. The editorial 
was “censored” using 
emergency powers. 
Many other newspapers 
also carried such blank 
spaces–sometimes 
to protest against 
emergency. Later, leaving 
blank space was also 
banned.
2018-19
6
chapter
the crisis of 
democratic order
Background to Emergency
We have already studied the changes that were taking place in Indian 
politics since 1967. Indira Gandhi had emerged as a towering leader 
with tremendous popularity. This was also the period when party 
competition became bitter and polarised. This period also witnessed 
tensions in the relationship between the government and the judiciary. 
The Supreme Court found many initiatives of the government to be 
violative of the Constitution. The Congress party took the position 
that this stand of the Court was against principles of democracy 
and parliamentary supremacy. The Congress also alleged that the 
Court was a conservative institution and it was becoming an obstacle 
in the way of implementing pro-poor welfare programmes. The 
parties opposed to the Congress felt that politics was becoming too 
personalised and that governmental authority was being converted 
into personal authority. The split in the Congress had sharpened the 
divisions between Indira Gandhi and her opponents. 
Economic context
In the elections of 1971, Congress had given the slogan 
of garibi hatao (remove poverty). However, the social and 
economic condition in the country did not improve much 
after 1971-72. The Bangladesh crisis had put a heavy strain 
on India’s economy. About eight million people crossed over 
the East Pakistan border into India. This was followed by war 
with Pakistan.  After the war the U.S government stopped all 
aid to India. In the international market, oil prices increased 
manifold during this period.  This led to an all-round increase 
in prices of commodities.  Prices increased by 23 per cent in 
1973 and 30 per cent in 1974.  Such a high level of inflation 
caused much hardship to the people. 
Industrial growth was low and unemployment was 
very high, particularly in the rural areas.  In order to 
reduce expenditure the government froze the salaries of 
its employees.  This caused further dissatisfaction among 
government employees. Monsoons failed in 1972-1973. This 
resulted in a sharp decline in agricultural productivity.  Food 
grain output declined by 8 per cent. There was a general 
atmosphere of dissatisfaction with the prevailing economic 
Credit: Abu
 ✁
✂
✄
☎
✂
2018-19
104                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
situation all over the country. In such a context non-Congress 
opposition parties were able to organise popular protests effectively. 
Instances of students’ unrests that had persisted from the late 1960s 
became more pronounced in this period. There was also an increase 
in the activities of Marxist groups who did not believe in parliamentary 
politics.  These groups had taken to arms and insurgent techniques 
for the overthrow of the capitalist order and the established political 
system. Known as the Marxist-Leninist (now Maoist) groups or 
Naxalites, they were particularly strong in West Bengal, where the 
State government took stringent measures to suppress them. 
Gujarat and Bihar movements
Students’ protests in Gujarat and Bihar, both of which were Congress 
ruled States, had far reaching impact on the politics of the two States 
and national politics.  In January 1974 students in Gujarat started 
an agitation against rising prices of food grains, cooking oil and 
other essential commodities, and against corruption in high places. 
The students’ protest was joined by major opposition parties and 
became widespread leading to the imposition of President’s rule in the 
state.  The opposition parties demanded fresh elections to the state 
legislature. Morarji Desai, a prominent leader of Congress (O), who 
was the main rival of Indira Gandhi when he was in the Congress, 
announced that he would go on an indefinite fast if fresh elections 
were not held in the State. Under intense pressure from students, 
supported by the opposition political parties, assembly elections were 
held in Gujarat in June 1975. The Congress was defeated in this 
election. 
In March 1974 students came together in Bihar to protest against 
rising prices, food scarcity, unemployment and corruption.  After 
a point they invited Jayaprakash Narayan (JP), who had given up 
active politics and was involved in social work, to lead the student 
movement. He accepted it on the condition that the movement will 
remain non-violent and will not limit itself to Bihar. Thus the students’ 
movement assumed a political character and had national appeal. 
People from all walks of life now entered 
the movement.  Jayaprakash Narayan 
demanded the dismissal of the Congress 
government in Bihar and gave a call for 
total revolution in the social, economic 
and political spheres in order to establish 
what he considered to be true democracy. 
A series of bandhs, gehraos, and strikes 
were organised in protest against the 
Bihar 
government. 
The 
government, 
however, refused to resign. 
                 Sampoorna Kranti 
ab nara hai, bhavi itihas 
hamara hai [With To al 
Revolution as our mo  o, the 
future belongs to us]
A slogan of the Bihar 
movement, 1974“
“
                  Indira is India, 
India is Indira
A slogan given by 
D. K. Barooah, President of the 
Congress, 1974
“
“
Poor 
people must have 
had a tough time. What 
happened to the promise 
of garibi hatao?
2018-19
T e Crisis o  Democratic Order  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       105  
The Naxalite Movement
In 1967 a peasant uprising took place in the Naxalbari police station area of 
Darjeeling hills district in West Bengal under the leadership of the local cadres 
of the Communist Party of India (Marxist). Beginning from the Naxalbari police 
station, the peasant movement spread to several states of India and came to 
be referred broadly as the Naxalite movement.  In 1969, they broke off from the 
CPI (M) and a new party, Communist Party (Marxist-Leninist) (CPI-ML), was 
formed under the leadership of Charu Majumdar. It argued that democracy in 
India was a sham and decided to adopt a strategy of protracted guerrilla warfare 
in order to lead to a revolution.  
The Naxalite movement has 
used force to snatch land from 
the rich landowners and give it 
to the poor and the landless. Its 
supporters advocated the use of 
violent means to achieve their 
political goals. In spite of the use 
of preventive detention and other 
strong measures adopted by the 
West Bengal government run by 
the Congress party, the Naxalite 
movement did not come to an end. In later years, it spread to many other parts 
of the country. The Naxalite movement has by now splintered into various 
parties and organisations. Some of these parties, like the CPI – ML (Liberation) 
participate in open, democratic politics.
Currently about 75 districts in nine States are affected by Naxalite violence. 
Most of these are very backward areas inhabited by Adivasis.  In these areas the 
sharecroppers, under-tenants and 
small cultivators are denied their 
basic rights with regard to security 
of tenure or their share in produce, 
payment of fair wages etc.  Forced 
labour, expropriation of resources 
by outsiders and exploitation by 
moneylenders are also common 
in these areas.  These conditions 
lead to the growth of the Naxalite 
movement. 
Governments have taken stern 
measures in dealing with the 
Naxalite 
movement. 
Human 
right 
activists 
have 
criticised 
the 
government 
for 
violating 
constitutional norms in dealing 
with the Naxalites. Many thousand people have lost their lives in the violence by 
the Naxalites and the anti-Naxalite violence by the government. 
Charu Majumdar 
(1918-1972): Communist 
revolutionary and the 
leader of the Naxalbari 
uprising;  participated in 
the Tebhaga movement 
before independence; left 
the CPI and  founded the 
Communist Party of India 
(Marxist-Leninist); believed 
in the Maoist path of peasant rebellion and 
defended revolutionary violence; died in police 
custody.
T e Crisis o  Democratic Order  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       105  
2018-19
106                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
The movement was beginning to 
influence national politics. Jayaprakash 
Narayan wanted to spread the Bihar 
movement 
to 
other 
parts 
of 
the 
country. Alongside the agitation led by 
Jayaprakash Narayan, the employees of 
the Railways gave a call for a nationwide 
strike. This threatened to paralyse the 
country. In 1975, JP led a peoples’ 
march to the Parliament. This was one 
of the largest political rallies ever held 
in the capital. He was now supported 
by the non-Congress opposition parties 
like the Bharatiya Jana Sangh, the 
Congress (O), the Bharatiya Lok Dal, the 
Socialist Party and others. These parties 
were projecting JP as an alternative to 
Indira Gandhi. However, there were many 
criticisms about his ideas and about the 
politics of mass agitations that he was 
employing. Both the Gujarat and Bihar 
Loknayak 
Jayaprakash 
Narayan (JP) 
(1902-1979): A 
marxist in his youth; 
founder general 
secretary of the 
Congress Socialist 
Party and the Socialist Party; a hero of the 1942 
Quit India movement; declined to join Nehru’s 
cabinet; after 1955 quit active politics; became 
a Gandhian and was involved in the Bhoodan 
movement, negotiations with the Naga rebels, 
peace initiative in Kashmir and ensured the 
surrender of decoits in Chambal; leader of Bihar 
movement, he became the symbol of opposition to 
Emergency and was the moving force behind the 
formation of Janata Party.
Credit: R. K. Laxman in The Times of India, 16 April 1974
2018-19
T e Crisis o  Democratic Order  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       107  
agitations were seen as anti-Congress and rather than opposing the 
State governments, they were seen as protests against the leadership 
of Indira Gandhi. She believed that the movement was motivated by 
personal opposition to her.
Do ‘committed 
judiciary’ and 
‘committed bureaucracy’ 
mean that the judges 
and government officials 
should be loyal to the 
ruling party?
Railway Strike of 1974
What would happen when the railways stop running? Not for one or 
two days, but for more than a week? Of course, many people would be 
inconvenienced; but more than that, the economy of the country would 
come to a halt because goods are transported from one part to another 
by trains. 
Do you know that such a thing actually happened in 1974? The National 
Coordination Committee for Railwaymen’s Struggle led by George 
Fernandes gave a call for nationwide strike by all employees of the Railways 
for pressing their demands related to bonus and service conditions. The 
government was opposed to these demands. So, the employees of India’s 
largest public sector undertaking went on a strike in May 1974. The strike 
by the Railway employees added to the atmosphere of labour unrest. It 
also raised issues like rights of the workers and whether employees of 
essential services should adopt measures like strikes. 
The government declared the strike illegal. As the government refused 
to concede the demands of the striking workers, arrested many of their 
leaders and deployed the territorial army to protect railway tracks, the 
strike had to be called off after twenty days without any settlement.  
Conflict with Judiciary
This was also the period when the government and the ruling party 
had many differences with the judiciary. Do you remember the 
discussion about the long drawn conflict between the Parliament and 
the judiciary? You have studied this last year.  Three constitutional 
issues had emerged. Can the Parliament abridge Fundamental Rights? 
The Supreme Court said it cannot. Secondly, can the Parliament 
curtail the right to property by making an amendment? Again, the 
Court said that Parliament cannot amend the Constitution in such 
a manner that rights are curtailed. Thirdly, the Parliament amended 
the Constitution saying that it can abridge Fundamental Rights for 
giving effect to Directive Principles. But the Supreme Court rejected 
this provision also. This led to a crisis as far as the relations between 
the government and the judiciary were concerned. You may remember 
that this crisis culminated in the famous Kesavananda Bharati Case. In 
this case, the Court gave a decision that there are some basic features 
of the Constitution and the Parliament cannot amend these features. 
Two developments further added to the tension between the 
judiciary and the executive. Immediately after the Supreme Court’s 
2018-19
108                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
decision in 1973 in the Keshavananda Bharati case, a vacancy arose 
for the post of the Chief Justice of India. It had been a practice to 
appoint the senior-most judge of the Supreme Court as the Chief 
Justice. But in 1973, the government set aside the seniority of 
three judges and appointed Justice A. N. Ray as the Chief Justice 
of India. The appointment became politically controversial because 
all the three judges who were superseded had given rulings against 
the stand of the government. Thus, constitutional interpretations 
and political ideologies were getting mixed up rapidly. People close 
to the Prime Minister started talking of the need for a judiciary and 
the bureaucracy ‘committed’ to the vision of the executive and the 
legislature. The climax of the confrontation was of course the ruling 
of the High Court declaring Indira Gandhi’s election invalid.
De laration o  Emergency
On 12 June 1975, Justice Jagmohan Lal Sinha of the Allahabad High 
Court passed a judgment declaring Indira Gandhi’s election to the 
Lok Sabha invalid. This order came on an election petition filed by Raj 
Narain, a socialist leader and a candidate who had contested against 
her in 1971. The petition, challenged the election of Indira Gandhi 
on the ground that she had used the services of government servants 
in her election campaign. The judgment of the High Court meant that 
legally she was no more an MP and therefore, could not remain the 
Prime Minister unless she was once again elected as an MP within six 
months. On June 24, the Supreme Court granted her a partial stay on 
the High Court order – till her appeal was decided, she could remain an 
MP but could not take part in the proceedings of the Lok Sabha.  
Crisis and response
The stage was now set for a big political confrontation. The opposition 
political parties led by Jayaprakash Narayan pressed for Indira 
Gandhi’s resignation and organised a massive demonstration in 
Delhi’s Ramlila grounds on 25 June 1975. Jayaprakash announced 
a nationwide satyagraha for her resignation and asked the army, the 
police and government employees not to obey “illegal and immoral 
orders”.  This too threatened to bring the activities of the government 
to a standstill. The political mood of the country had turned against 
the Congress, more than ever before. 
The response of the government was to declare a state of emergency. 
On 25 June 1975, the government declared that there was a threat 
of internal disturbances and therefore, it invoked Article 352 of the 
Constitution. Under the provision of this article the government could 
declare a state of emergency on grounds of external threat or a threat 
of internal disturbances. The government decided that a grave crisis 
had arisen which made the proclamation of a state of emergency 
necessary. Technically speaking this was within the powers of the 
That is like asking 
the army to disobey 
the government! Is 
that democratic?
2018-19
T e Crisis o  Democratic Order  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       109  
government, for our Constitution provides for some special powers to 
the government once an emergency is declared. 
Once an emergency is proclaimed, the federal distribution of powers 
remains practically suspended and all the powers are concentrated in 
the hands of the union government. Secondly, the government also 
gets the power to curtail or restrict all or any of the Fundamental 
Rights during the emergency. From the wording of the provisions of 
the Constitution, it is clear that an Emergency is seen as an extra-
ordinary condition in which normal democratic politics cannot 
function. Therefore, special powers are granted to the government. 
On the night of 25 June 1975, the Prime Minister recommended 
the imposition of Emergency to President Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed. He 
issued the proclamation immediately. After midnight, the electricity 
to all the major newspaper offices was disconnected. In the early 
morning, a large number of leaders and workers of the opposition 
parties were arrested. The Cabinet was informed about it at a special 
meeting at 6 a.m. on 26 June, after all this had taken place.
This cartoon appeared few days before the declaration of Emergency and captures the sense of impending 
political crisis. The man behind the chair is D. K. Barooah, the Congress President.
Should 
the President 
have declared 
Emergency without any 
recommendation from the 
Cabinet? 
Credit: R. K. Laxman in The Times of India, 26 June 1975
2018-19
110                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
110                                                           
11 December 1975
2018-19
T e Crisis o  Democratic Order  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       111  
                                                    
 
 
 
 
                                                111  
2018-19
112                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
Consequences
This brought the agitation to an abrupt stop; strikes were banned; 
many opposition leaders were put in jail; the political situation became 
very quiet though tense. Deciding to use its special powers under 
Emergency provisions, the government suspended the freedom of the 
Press. Newspapers were asked to get prior approval for all material 
to be published. This is known as press censorship. Apprehending 
social and communal disharmony, the government banned Rashtriya 
Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) and Jamait-e-Islami. Protests and strikes 
and public agitations were also disallowed.  Most importantly, under 
the provisions of Emergency, the various Fundamental Rights of 
citizens stood suspended, including the right of citizens to move the 
Court for restoring their Fundamental Rights. 
The government made extensive use of preventive detention. Under 
this provision, people are arrested and detained not because they have 
committed any offence, but on the apprehension that they may commit 
an offence. Using preventive detention acts, the government made 
large scale arrests during the Emergency.  Arrested political workers 
could not challenge their arrest through habeas corpus petitions. 
Many cases were filed in the High Courts and the Supreme Court by 
and on behalf of arrested persons, but the government claimed that it 
was not even necessary to inform the arrested persons of the reasons 
and grounds of their arrest. Several High Courts gave judgments that 
even after the declaration of Emergency the courts could entertain a 
writ of habeas corpus filed by a person challenging his/her detention. 
In April 1976, the constitution bench of the Supreme Court over-ruled 
the High Courts and accepted the government’s plea. It meant that 
during Emergency the government could take away the citizen’s right 
to life and liberty. This judgment closed the doors of judiciary for the 
citizens and is regarded as one of the most controversial judgments 
of the Supreme Court.
There were many acts of dissent and resistance to the Emergency. 
Many political workers who were not arrested in the first wave, 
went ‘underground’ and organised protests against the government. 
Newspapers like the Indian Express and the Statesman protested 
against censorship by leaving blank spaces where news items had 
been censored. Magazines like the Seminar and the Mainstream chose 
to close down rather than submit to censorship. Many journalists 
were arrested for writing against the Emergency. Many underground 
newsletters and leaflets were published to bypass censorship. Kannada 
writer Shivarama Karanth, awarded with Padma Bhushan, and Hindi 
writer Fanishwarnath Renu, awarded with Padma Shri, returned their 
awards in protest against the suspension of democracy. By and large, 
though, such open acts of defiance and resistance were rare.
The Parliament also brought in many new changes to the 
Constitution. In the background of the ruling of the Allahabad High 
Now, 
even the 
Supreme Court 
gave in! What 
was happening to 
everyone in those 
days?
2018-19
T e Crisis o  Democratic Order  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       113  
Court in the Indira Gandhi case, an amendment was made declaring 
that elections of Prime Minister, President and Vice-President could 
not be challenged in the Court. The forty-second amendment was 
also passed during the Emergency. You have already studied that 
this amendment consisted of a series of changes in many parts of the 
Constitution. Among the various changes made by this amendment, 
one was that the duration of the legislatures in the country was 
extended from five to six years. This change was not only for the 
Emergency period, but was intended to be of a permanent nature. 
Besides this, during an Emergency, elections can be postponed by 
one year. Thus, effectively, after 1971, elections needed to be held 
only in 1978; instead of 1976. 
Controversie  regarding Emergency
Emergency is one of the most controversial episodes in Indian politics. 
One reason is that there are differing view points about the need to 
declare emergency. Another reason is that using the powers given by 
the Constitution, the government practically suspended the democratic 
functioning. As the investigations by the Shah Commission after the 
Emergency found out, there were many ‘excesses’ committed during 
the Emergency. Finally, there are varying assessments of what the 
lessons of Emergency are for the practice of democracy in India. Let 
us look at these one by one.
Was the Emergency necessary?
The Constitution simply mentioned ‘internal 
disturbances’ as the reason for declaring 
Emergency. Before 1975, Emergency was 
never proclaimed on this ground. We have 
noted that agitations were going on in 
many parts of the country. Was this reason 
enough for declaring Emergency? The 
government argued that in a democracy, 
the opposition parties must allow the 
elected ruling party to govern according to 
its policies. It felt that frequent recourse to 
agitations, protests and collective action 
are not good for democracy. Supporters 
of Indira Gandhi also held that in a 
democracy, you cannot continuously have 
extra-parliamentary 
politics 
targeting 
the government. This leads to instability 
and distracts the administration from its 
routine task of ensuring development. All 
energies are diverted to maintenance of 
law and order. Indira Gandhi wrote in a 
Shah Commission of Inquiry
In May 1977, the Janata Party government 
appointed a Commission of Inquiry headed 
by Justice J.C. Shah, retired Chief Justice 
of the Supreme Court of India, to inquire 
“into several aspects of allegations of abuse 
of authority, excesses and malpractices 
committed and action taken in the wake 
of the Emergency proclaimed on the 25th 
June, 1975”. The Commission examined 
various kinds of evidence and called scores 
of witnesses to give testimonies. These 
included Indira Gandhi who appeared before 
the Commission but refused to answer any 
questions.
The Government of India accepted the 
findings, observations and recommendations 
contained in the two interim reports and third 
and final report of the Shah Commission. 
The reports were also tabled in the two 
houses of Parliament.
Let 
us not 
talk about the 
few who protested. 
What about the rest? 
All the big officials, 
intellectuals, social 
and religious leaders, 
citizens… What were 
they doing?
2018-19
114                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
letter to the Shah Commission that subversive forces were trying to 
obstruct the progressive programmes of the government and were 
attempting to dislodge her from power through extra-constitutional 
means.
Some other parties, like the CPI that continued to back the 
Congress during the Emergency, also believed that there was an 
international conspiracy against the unity of India. It believed that 
in such circumstances some restrictions on agitations were justified. 
                   In the name 
o  democracy it has been 
sought to negate the very 
functioning o  democracy.  
Duly elec ed governments 
have no  been allowed to 
function. …Agitations have 
surcharged the atmosphere, 
leading to violent incidents.  
…Certain persons have gone 
to the length o  inciting 
our armed force  to mutiny 
and our police to rebel.  T e 
force  o  disintegration are 
in full play and communal 
pa  ions are being aroused, 
threatening our unity.  
How can any Government 
worth the name stand by 
and allow the country’s 
stability to be imperilled?  
T e actions o  a few are 
endangering the rights o  the 
vast majority.
Indira Gandhi 
Addressing the nation on 
All India Radio on 
26 June 1975  
“
“
Demolitions in Turkman Gate area, Delhi 
Emergency witnessed large-scale displacement of people living in 
Delhi’s poorer localities. The jhuggi-jhopris were forcibly relocated in 
the then barren areas across the river Yamuna. One such affected 
area was the colonies in Turkman gate. The jhuggis of the area 
were demolished.  Hundreds of people of this area were forcibly 
sterilised. However, many people escaped sterilisation simply 
because they were able to motivate other people to get themselves 
sterilised and were rewarded by the grant of title to a piece of land. 
Thus, while some people became victims of government-sponsored 
actions, some people managed to victimise others in their desire to 
legally secure a piece of land, which would safeguard them from 
arbitrary displacement.
Source: Shah Commission of Inquiry, Interim Report II
Credit: R. K. Laxman in the Times of India
Mrs. Gandhi’s confrontation with the Shah Commission provoked this cartoon 
when the commission’s report was released. 
2018-19
T e Crisis o  Democratic Order  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       115  
The CPI felt that the agitations led by JP were mainly by the middle 
classes who were opposed to the radical policies of the Congress party. 
After the Emergency, the CPI felt that its assessment was mistaken 
and that it was an error to have supported the Emergency.
On the other hand, the critics of the Emergency argued that ever 
since the freedom movement, Indian politics had a history of popular 
struggles. JP and many other opposition leaders felt that in a democracy, 
people had the right to publicly protest against the government. The 
Bihar and Gujarat agitations were mostly peaceful and non-violent. 
Those who were arrested were never tried for any anti-national activity. 
No cases were registered against most of the detainees. The Home 
Ministry, which is entrusted with the responsibility of monitoring the 
internal situation of the country, also did not express any concern 
about the law and order situation in the country. If some agitations 
had over-stepped their limits, the government had enough routine 
powers to deal with it. There was no need to suspend democratic 
functioning and use draconian measures like the Emergency for that. 
The threat was not to the unity and integrity of the country but to the 
ruling party and to the Prime Minister herself. The critics say that 
Indira Gandhi misused a constitutional provision meant for saving 
the country to save her personal power.
What happened during emergency?
The actual implementation of the Emergency is another contentious 
issue. Did the government misuse its Emergency powers? Were there 
excesses and abuse of authority? The government said that it wanted 
to use the Emergency to bring law and order, restore efficiency, and 
above all, implement the pro-poor welfare programmes. For this 
purpose, the government led by Indira Gandhi announced a twenty-
point programme and declared its determination to implement this 
programme. The twenty-point programme included land reforms, land 
redistribution, review of agricultural wages, workers’ participation in 
management, eradication of bonded labour, etc. In the initial months 
 Let’s re-search
Ask your parents or other elders in the family or neighbourhood about 
their experience during 1975-77. Take down notes on the following:
• 
Their personal experience of the Emergency.
• 
Any report of support or opposition to the Emergency in your   
 
 
locality.
• 
Their participation in the 1977 elections and why they voted the   
 
way they did.
Put your notes together and make a collective report on ‘Emergency in 
my city/village.’
2018-19
116                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
after the declaration of Emergency, the urban middle classes were 
generally happy over the fact that agitations came to an end and 
discipline was enforced on the government employees. The poor and 
rural people also expected effective implementation of the welfare 
programmes that the government was promising. Thus, different 
sections of society had different expectations from the emergency and 
also different viewpoints about it.
Critics of Emergency point out that most of these promises by 
the government remained unfulfilled, that these were simply meant 
to divert attention from the excesses that were taking place. They 
question the use of preventive detention on such a large scale. We have 
noted that many prominent political leaders were arrested. In all, 676 
opposition leaders were arrested. The Shah Commission estimated 
that nearly one lakh eleven thousand people were arrested under 
preventive detention laws. Severe restrictions were put on the press, 
sometimes without proper legal sanctions.  The Shah Commission 
report mentions that the General Manager of the Delhi Power Supply 
Corporation received verbal orders from the office of the Lt. Governor 
of Delhi to cut electricity to all newspaper presses at 2.00 a.m. on 26 
June, 1975. Electricity was restored two to three days later after the 
censorship apparatus had been set up. 
Credit: R. K. Laxman in the Times of India
2018-19
T e Crisis o  Democratic Order  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       117  
There were other and more serious allegations regarding the 
exercise of governmental power by people who held no official 
position. Sanjay Gandhi, the Prime Minister’s younger son, did not 
hold any official position at the time. Yet, he gained control over 
the administration and allegedly interfered in the functioning of the 
government. His role in the demolitions and forced sterilisation in 
Delhi became very controversial.
Apart from the arrests of political workers and the restrictions on 
the press, the Emergency directly affected lives of common people 
in many cases. Torture and custodial deaths occurred during the 
Emergency; arbitrary relocation of poor people also took place; and 
over-enthusiasm about population control led to cases of compulsory 
sterilisation. These instances show what happens when the normal 
democratic process is suspended. 
Lessons of the Emergency
The Emergency at once brought out both the weaknesses and the 
strengths of India’s democracy.  Though there are many observers 
who think that India ceased to be democratic during the Emergency, 
it is noteworthy that normal democratic functioning resumed within 
a short span of time. Thus, one lesson of Emergency is that it is 
extremely difficult to do away with democracy in India.
Secondly, it brought out some ambiguities regarding the Emergency 
provision in the Constitution that have been rectified since. Now, 
Custodial death of  Rajan 
On 1 March 1976, P. Rajan, a final year student of the Calicut 
Engineering College, Kerala, was whisked away from the hostel in the 
early hours along with another student, Joseph Chali. Rajan’s  father, 
T.V Eachara Warrior made frantic efforts to trace his son. He met 
legislators, he petitioned the concerned authorities, he also sought the 
help of the then Home Minister, K. Karunakaran. As the emergency was 
proclaimed, issues relating to the citizen’s liberty could not be raised 
in the courts. After the Emergency was lifted, Warrior filed a petition 
for writ of Habeas Corpus in the Kerala High Court at Ernakulam. 
From the evidence of witnesses, it became clear that from the hostel, 
Rajan had been taken to the Tourist Bungalow in Calicut the next day 
where he was tortured by the police. At a subsequent hearing Kerala 
government told the High Court that Raian had died in “unlawful police 
custody”, as a result of continuous police torture. The Division Bench 
of Kerala High Court held that Karunakaran had lied to the Court. 
K. Karunakaran who had by then become Chief Minister of Kerala, had 
to resign because of the strictures passed by the High Court.
Source: Shah Commission of Inquiry, Interim Report II 
               … death o  
D. E. M. O’Cracy, mourned by 
his wife T. Ruth, his son 
L. I. Bertie, and his 
daughters Faith, Hope and 
Justice.
An anonymous 
advertisement in the Times 
of India, soon after the 
declaration of Emergency, 
1975. “
“
2018-19
118                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
‘internal’ Emergency can be proclaimed only on the grounds 
of ‘armed rebellion’ and it is necessary that the  advice to the 
President to proclaim Emergency must be given in writing  by 
the Union Cabinet.
Thirdly, the Emergency made everyone more aware of the 
value of civil liberties. The Courts too, have taken an active 
role after the Emergency in protecting the civil liberties of the 
individuals. This is a response to the inability of the judiciary 
to protect civil liberties effectively during the emergency. Many 
civil liberties organisations came up after this experience.
However, the critical years of emergency brought many 
issues that have not been adequately grappled with. We have 
noted in this chapter that there is a tension between routine 
functioning of a democratic government and the continuous 
political protests by parties and groups. What is the correct 
balance between the two?  Should the citizens have full freedom 
to engage in protest activity or should they have no such right 
at all? What are the limits to such a protest?
Secondly, the actual implementation of the Emergency rule took 
place through the police and the administration. These institutions 
could not function independently. They were turned into political 
instruments of the ruling party and according to the Shah Commission 
Report, the administration and the police became vulnerable to 
political pressures. This problem did not vanish after the Emergency. 
Politics af er Emergency
The most valuable and lasting lesson of the Emergency was learnt 
as soon as the Emergency was over and the Lok Sabha elections 
were announced. The 1977 elections turned into a referendum on the 
experience of the Emergency, at least in north India where the impact 
of the Emergency was felt most strongly. The opposition fought the 
election on the slogan of ‘save democracy’. The people’s verdict was 
decisively against the Emergency. The lesson was clear and has been 
reiterated in many state level elections thereafter – governments that 
are perceived to be anti-democratic are severely punished by the voters. 
In this sense the experience of 1975 -77 ended up strengthening the 
foundations of democracy in India.
Lok Sabha Elections, 1977
In January 1977, after eighteen months of Emergency, the government 
decided to hold elections.  Accordingly, all the leaders and activists were 
released from jails. Elections were held in March 1977. This left the 
opposition with very little time, but political developments took place 
very rapidly. The major opposition parties had already been coming 
closer in the pre-Emergency period. Now they came together on the   
                Today is India’s 
Independence Day…Don’t 
Le  the Lights Go Out on 
India’s Democracy
An advertisement in The 
Times, London, 
15 August 1975 by 
‘Free JP Campaign’. “
“
2018-19
T e Crisis o  Democratic Order  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       119  
eve of the elections and formed a new party, known as the 
Janata Party. The new party accepted the leadership of 
Jayaprakash Narayan. Some leaders of the Congress who 
were opposed to the Emergency also joined this new party. 
Some other Congress leaders also came out and formed a 
separate party under the leadership of Jagjivan Ram. This 
party named as Congress for Democracy, later merged with 
the Janata Party. 
The Janata Party made this election into a referendum 
on the Emergency. Its campaign was focused on the non-
democratic character of the rule and on the various excesses 
that took place during this period. In the backdrop of arrests 
of thousands of persons and the censorship of the Press, 
the public opinion was against the Congress. Jayaprakash 
Narayan became the popular symbol of restoration of 
democracy. The formation of the Janata Party also ensured 
that non-Congress votes would not be divided. It was evident 
that the going was tough for the Congress.
Yet the final results took everyone by surprise. For 
the first time since Independence, the Congress party was 
defeated in the Lok Sabha elections.  The Congress could 
win only 154 seats in the Lok Sabha. Its share of popular 
votes fell to less than 35 per cent.  The Janata Party and 
Morarji Desai 
(1896-1995): Freedom 
fighter; a Gandhian 
leader; Proponenet of 
Khadi, naturopathy and 
prohibition; Chief Minister 
of Bombay State; Deputy 
Prime Minister (1967-
1969); joined Congress 
(O) after the split in the 
party; Prime Minister from 
1977 to 1979—first Prime 
Minister belonging to a 
non-Congress party.
Credit: R. K. Laxman 
in The Times of India 
29 March 1977
A cartoonist’s 
reading of who 
won and what 
was defeated in 
the 1977 election. 
Those standing 
with the common 
man include 
Jagjivan Ram, 
Morarji Desai, 
Charan Singh 
and Atal Behari 
Vajpayee.
2018-19
120                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
its allies won 330 out of the 542 seats in the Lok Sabha; Janata Party 
itself won 295 seats and thus enjoyed a clear majority. In north India, 
it was a massive electoral wave against the Congress. The Congress 
lost in every constituency in Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana and 
the Punjab and could win only one seat each in Rajasthan and Madhya 
Pradesh. Indira Gandhi was defeated from Rae Bareli, as was her son 
Sanjay Gandhi from Amethi. 
But if you look at the map showing the result of this election, you 
will notice that Congress did not lose elections all over the country. 
It retained many seats in Maharashtra, Gujarat and Orissa and 
virtually swept through the southern States. There are many reasons 
for this. To begin with, the impact of Emergency was not felt equally 
in all the States. The forced relocation and displacements, the forced 
sterilisations, were mostly concentrated in the northern States. 
But more importantly, north India had experienced some long term 
changes in the nature of political competition. The middle castes from 
north India were beginning to move away from the Congress and the 
Janata party became a platform for many of these sections to come 
together. In this sense, the elections of 1977 were not merely about 
the Emergency.  
Janata Government
The Janata Party government that came to power after the 1977 elections 
was far from cohesive. After the election, there was stiff competition 
among three leaders for the post of Prime Minister – Morarji Desai, who 
Oath taking by the first non-congress government at the centre in 1977. In the picture are 
Jayaprakash Narayan, J. B. Kriplani, Morarji Desai and Atal Behari Vajpayee.
2018-19
T e Crisis o  Democratic Order  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       121  
How can 
we talk about a 
mandate or verdict in 
1977 when the north 
and the south voted so 
differently? 
Read this map and identify the states where 
 –  Congress lost, 
 –  Congress lost very badly and 
 –  those states where Congress and its allies nearly  
 
swept the polls.
Which are the constituencies in north India that the 
Congress managed to win?
Note: This illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to 
be an authentic depiction of India’s external boundaries. 
2018-19
122                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
Chaudhary 
Charan Singh 
(1902-1987): 
Prime Minister 
of India between 
July1979 - January 
1980; freedom 
fighter; active 
in the politics of 
Uttar Pradesh; 
proponent of rural 
and agricultural 
development; left 
Congress party 
and founded 
Bharatiya Kranti 
Dal in 1967; twice 
Chief Minister 
of U.P.; later he 
was one of the 
founders of the 
Janata Party in 
1977 and became 
Deputy Prime 
Minister and 
Home Minister 
(1977-79); 
founder of 
Lok Dal.
I got it! 
Emergency 
was like a 
vaccination 
against 
dictatorship. It 
was painful and 
caused fever, but 
strengthened 
the resistance 
of our 
democracy.  
Credit: R. K. Laxman in The Times of India, 13 November 1979
Credit: R. K. Laxman in the Times of India
Credit: Atanu Roy/India Today
Janata Party’s faction fight inspired many cartoons at that time. Here is a selection.
2018-19
T e Crisis o  Democratic Order  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       123  
was the rival to Indira Gandhi ever since 1966-67; Charan Singh, leader 
of the Bharatiya Lok Dal and a farmers’ leader from UP; and Jagjivan 
Ram, who had vast experience as a senior minister in the Congress 
governments. Eventually Morarji Desai became the Prime Minister but 
that did not bring the power struggle within the party to an end. 
The opposition to Emergency could keep the Janata Party together 
only for a while. Its critics felt that the Janata Party  lacked direction, 
leadership, and a common programme. The Janata Party government 
could not bring about a fundamental change in policies from those 
pursued by the Congress. The Janata Party split and the government 
which was led by Morarji Desai lost its majority in less than 18 
months.  Another government headed by Charan Singh was formed on 
the assurance of the support of the Congress party.  But the Congress 
party later decided to withdraw its support with the result that the 
Charan Singh government could remain in power for just about four 
months.  Fresh Lok Sabha elections were held in January 1980 in 
which the Janata Party suffered a comprehensive defeat, especially in 
north India where it had swept the polls in 1977.  Congress party 
led by Indira Gandhi nearly repeated its great victory in 1971.
It won 353 seats and came back to power. The experience of
1977-79 taught another lesson in democratic politics: governments 
that are seen to be unstable and quarrelsome are severely 
punished by the voters. 
Legacy
But was it only a case of return of Indira Gandhi? Between 
the elections of 1977 and 1980 the party system had changed 
dramatically.  Since 1969, the Congress party had starting 
shedding its character as an umbrella party which accommodated 
leaders and workers of different ideological dispensations and 
view points.  The Congress party now identified itself with a 
particular ideology, claiming to be the only socialist and pro-poor 
party.  Thus with the early nineteen seventies, the Congress’s 
political success depended on attracting people on the basis of 
sharp social and ideological divisions and the appeal of one leader, 
Indira Gandhi. With the change in the nature of the Congress 
party, other opposition parties relied more and more on what is 
known in Indian politics as ‘non-Congressism’. They also realised 
the need to avoid a division of non-Congress votes in the election. 
This factor played a major role in the elections of 1977.  
In an indirect manner the issue of welfare of the backward 
castes also began to dominate politics since 1977. As we saw 
above, the results of 1977 elections were at least partly due to 
a shift among the backward castes of north India. Following the 
Lok Sabha elections, many states also held Assembly elections 
in 1977. Again, the northern States elected non-Congress 
governments in which the leaders of the backward castes played 
Jagjivan Ram 
(1908-1986): 
Freedom fighter and 
Congress leader from 
Bihar; Deputy Prime 
Minister of India 
(1977-79); member 
of Constituent 
Assembly; also 
a Member of 
Parliament since 
1952 till his death; 
Labour Minister in the 
first ministry of free 
India; held various 
other ministries from 
1952 to 1977; a 
scholar and astute 
administrator.
2018-19
124                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
an important role. The issue of reservations for ‘other backward 
classes’ became very controversial in Bihar and following this, the 
Mandal Commission was appointed by the Janata Party government 
at the centre. You will read more about this and about the role of the 
politics of backward castes, in the last chapter. The elections after 
the Emergency set off the process of this change in the party system. 
The Emergency and the period around it can be described as a period 
of constitutional crisis because it had its origins in the constitutional 
battle over the jurisdiction of the Parliament and the judiciary. On the 
other hand, it was also a period of political crisis. The party in power 
had absolute majority and yet, its leadership decided to suspend 
Credit: R. K. Laxman in the Times of India
Credit: India Today
This cartoon appeared after the election results of 1980.
2018-19
T e Crisis o  Democratic Order  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       125  
Let’s watch a Film
HAZARON KHWAISHEIN AISI
Siddharth, Vikram and Geeta 
are three spirited and socially 
engaged students. Graduating 
from Delhi, they follow different 
paths. While Siddharth is a strong 
supporter of the revolutionary 
ideology of social transformation, 
Vikram is in favour of achieving 
success in life, whatever the cost. 
The film narrates the story of their 
journeys towards their goals and 
the underlying disappointments. 
The film is set in the backdrop of the 
seventies. The young characters 
are products of the expectations 
and idealism of that period. 
Siddharth is not successful in his 
ambition to stage a revolution, but 
is so involved in the plight of the 
poor that he begins valuing their 
uplift more than revolution. On 
the other hand, Vikram becomes 
a typical political fixer but is 
constantly ill at ease. 
Year: 2005
Director: Sudhir Mishra
Screenplay: Sudhir Mishra    
Ruchi Narain    
Shivkumar Subramaniam 
Cast: Kay Kay Menon, Shiney 
Ahuja, Chitrangada Singh
the democratic process. The makers 
of India’s Constitution trusted that all 
political parties would basically abide 
by the democratic norm. Even during 
the Emergency, when the government 
would use extraordinary powers, its 
use would be within the norms of 
the rule of law.  This expectation led 
to the wide and open ended powers 
given to the government in times of 
Emergency. These were abused during 
the Emergency. This political crisis was 
more serious than the constitutional 
crisis. 
Another critical issue that emerged 
during this period was the role and extent 
of mass protests in a parliamentary 
democracy. There was clearly a tension 
between institution-based democracy 
and democracy based on spontaneous 
popular participation. This tension 
may be attributed to the inability of 
the party system to incorporate the 
aspirations of the people. In the two 
chapters that follow we shall study some 
of the manifestations of this tension, 
in particular, popular movements and 
debates around regional identity. 
2018-19
126                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
EXERCISES
1. State whether the following statements regarding the Emergency are   
correct or incorrect. 
 
(a) It was declared in 1975 by Indira Gandhi.
 
(b) It led to the suspension of all fundamental rights.
 
(c) It was proclaimed due to the deteriorating economic conditions.
 
(d) Many Opposition leaders were arrested during the emergency.
 
(e) CPI supported the proclamation of the Emergency.
2. Find the odd one out in the context of proclamation of Emergency 
 
(a) The call for ‘Total Revolution.
 
(b) The Railway Strike of 1974
 
(c) The Naxalite Movement
 
(d) The Allahbad High Court verdict
 
(e) The findings of the Shah Commission Report
3. Match the following
 
(a)  Total Revolution                i. 
Indira Gandhi
 
(b)  Garibi hatao                      ii. Jayaprakash Narayan
 
(c)  Students’ Protest              iii. Bihar Movement
 
(d)  Railway Strike                   iv. George Fernandes                             
4. What were the reasons which led to the mid-term elections in 1980?
5. The Shah Commission was appointed in 1977 by the Janata Party 
Government. Why was it appointed and what were its findings?
6. What reasons did the Government give for declaring a National Emergency 
in 1975?
7. The 1977 elections for the first time saw the Opposition coming into 
power at the Centre. What would you consider as the reasons for this 
development?
8. Discuss the effects of Emergency on the following aspects of our polity.
 
• 
Effects on civil liberties for citizens.
 
• 
Impact on relationship between the Executive and Judiciary
 
• 
Functioning of Mass Media
 
• 
Working of the Police and Bureaucracy.
9. In what way did the imposition of Emergency affect the party system in 
India? Elaborate your answer with examples. 
126                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
2018-19
T e Crisis o  Democratic Order  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       127  
10. Read the passage and answer the questions below:
 
Indian democracy was never so close to a two-party system as it was 
during the 1977 elections. However, the next few years saw a complete 
change. Soon after its defeat, the Indian National Congress split into 
two groups………..  …  … …The Janata Party also went through major 
convulsions…..David Butler, Ashok Lahiri and Prannoy Roy.  — PARTHA 
CHATTERJEE
 
(a) What made the party system in India look like a two-party system in  
 
1977?
 
(b) Many more than two parties existed in 1977. Why then are the  
 
 
authors describing this period as close to a two-party system?  
 
(c) What caused splits in Congress and the Janata parties?
T e Crisis o  Democratic Order  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       127  
2018-19
In this chapter…
Three decades after Independence, the people were beginning to 
get impatient. Their unease expressed itself in various forms. In the 
previous chapter, we have already gone through the story of electoral 
upheavals and political crisis. Yet that was not the only form in which 
popular discontent expressed itself. In the 1970s, diverse social groups 
like women, students, Dalits and farmers felt that democratic politics did 
not address their needs and demands. Therefore, they came together 
under the banner of various social organisations to voice their demands. 
These assertions marked the rise of popular movements or new social 
movements in Indian politics.
In this chapter we trace the journey of some of the popular movements 
that developed after the 1970s in order to understand:
• 
what are popular movements?
• 
which sections of Indian society have they mobilised? 
• 
what is the main agenda of these movements?
• 
what role do they play in a democratic set up like ours?
Photograph on this 
and the facing page 
are of the participants 
and leaders of the 
Chipko Movement, 
recognised as one of 
the first environmental 
movements in the 
country. 
Credit: Bhawan Singh
2018-19
7
chapter
rise of popular 
movements
Nature o  popular movements
Take a look at the opening image of this chapter. What do you see 
there? Villagers have literally embraced the trees. Are they playing 
some game? Or participating in some ritual or festival? Not really. The 
image here depicts a very unusual form of collective action in which 
men and women from a village in what is now Uttarakhand were 
engaged in early 1973. These villagers were protesting against the 
practices of commercial logging that the government had permitted. 
They used a novel tactic for their protest –  that of hugging the trees 
to prevent them from being cut down. These protests marked the 
beginning of a world-famous environmental movement in our country 
– the Chipko movement. 
Chipko movement
The movement began in two or three villages of Uttarakhand when the 
forest department refused permission to the villagers to fell ash trees 
for making agricultural tools. However, the forest department allotted 
the same patch of land to a sports manufacturer for commercial 
use. This enraged the villagers and they protested against the move 
of the government. The struggle soon spread across many parts of 
the Uttarakhand region. Larger issues of ecological and economic 
exploitation of the region were raised. The villagers demanded that 
no forest-exploiting contracts should be given to outsiders and local 
communities should have effective control over natural resources 
like land, water and forests. They wanted the government to provide 
low cost materials to small industries and ensure development of 
Fascinating! 
But I wonder how it 
relates to the history of 
politics.
Two historic 
pictures of the 
early Chipko 
movement in 
Chamoli, 
Uttarakhand.
Credit: Anupam Mishra
2018-19
130                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
the region without disturbing the ecological balance. The movement 
took up economic issues of landless forest workers and asked for 
guarantees of minimum wage. 
Women’s active participation in the Chipko agitation was a very 
novel aspect of the movement. The forest contractors of the region 
usually doubled up as suppliers of alcohol to men. Women held 
sustained agitations against the habit of alcoholism and broadened the 
agenda of the movement to cover other social issues. The movement 
achieved a victory  when the government issued a ban on felling of 
trees in the Himalayan regions for fifteen years, until the green cover 
was fully restored. But more than that, the Chipko movement, which 
started over a single issue, became a symbol of many such popular 
movements emerging in different parts of the country during the 1970s 
and later. In this chapter we shall study some of these movements. 
Party based movements
Popular movements may take the form of social movements or political 
movements and there is often an overlap between the two.  The 
nationalist movement, for example, was mainly a political movement. 
But we also know that deliberations on social and economic issues 
during the colonial period gave rise to independent social movements 
like the anti-caste movement, the kisan sabhas and the trade union 
movement in early twentieth century. These movements raised issues 
related to some underlying social conflicts.  
Some of these movements continued in the post-independence 
period as well. Trade union movement had a strong presence among 
industrial workers in major cities like Mumbai, Kolkata and Kanpur. 
All major political parties established their own trade unions for 
mobilising these sections of workers. Peasants in the Telangana 
region of Andhra Pradesh organised massive agitations under the 
leadership of Communist parties in the early years of independence 
and demanded redistribution of land to cultivators. Peasants and 
agricultural labourers in parts of Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal, 
Bihar and adjoining areas continued their agitations under 
the leadership of the Marxist-Leninist workers; who were 
known as the Naxalites (you have already read about the 
Naxalite movement in the last chapter). The peasants’ 
and the workers’ movements mainly focussed on issues of 
economic injustice and inequality.
These movements did not participate in elections 
formally. And yet they retained connections with political 
parties, as many participants in these movements, as 
individuals and as organisations, were actively associated 
with parties. These links ensured a better representation of 
the demands of diverse social sections in party politics. 
I don’t get it. How can you do 
politics without a party?
2018-19
Rise o  Popular Movements     
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       131  
Non-party movements
In the 1970s and 1980s, many sections of the society became 
disillusioned with the functioning of political parties. Failure of 
the Janata experiment and the resulting political instability were 
the immediate causes. But in the long run the disillusionment 
was also about economic policies of the state. The model of 
planned development that we adopted after Independence 
was based on twin goals of growth and distribution. You have 
read about it in Chapter Three. In spite of the impressive 
growth in many sectors of economy in the first twenty years 
of independence, poverty and inequalities persisted on a large 
scale. Benefits of economic growth did not reach evenly to all 
sections of society. Existing social inequalities like caste and 
gender sharpened and complicated the issues of poverty in many 
ways. There also existed a gulf between the urban-industrial 
sector and the rural agrarian sector. A sense of injustice and 
deprivation grew among different groups. 
Many of the politically active groups lost faith in existing 
democratic institutions and electoral politics. They therefore 
chose to step outside of party politics and engage in mass 
mobilisation for registering their protests. Students and young 
political activists from various sections of the society were in 
the forefront in organising the marginalised sections such as 
Dalits and Adivasis. The middle class young activists launched 
service organisations and constructive programmes among 
rural poor.  Because of the voluntary nature of their social work, 
many of these organisations came to be known as voluntary 
organisations or voluntary sector organisations.
These voluntary organisations chose to remain outside 
party politics. They did not contest elections at the local or 
regional level nor did they support any one political party. Most 
of these groups believed in politics and wanted to participate in 
it, but not through political parties. Hence, these organisations 
were called ‘non-party political formations’. They hoped that 
direct and active participation by local groups of citizens would 
be more effective in resolving local issues than political parties. 
It was also hoped that direct participation by people will reform 
the nature of democratic government. 
Such voluntary sector organisations still continue their 
work in rural and urban areas. However, their nature has 
changed. Of late many of these organisations are funded by 
external agencies including international service agencies. The 
ideal of local initiatives is weakened as a result of availability of 
external funds on a large scale to these organisations.
Popular movements have inspired artistic production like these posters. 
The three posters (from Top to Bottom) are from a campaign against a Coca 
Cola plant, agitation against a highway and Save Periyar river movement.
Credit: Design and People
2018-19
132                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
Dalit Panthers
Read this poem by well-known Marathi poet Namdeo Dhasal. Do you 
know who these ‘pilgrims of darkness’ in this poem are and who the 
‘sunflower-giving fakir’ was that blessed them? The pilgrims were the 
Dalit communities who had experienced brutal caste injustices for a 
long time in our society and the poet is referring to Dr. Ambedkar as 
their liberator. Dalit poets in Maharashtra wrote many such poems 
during the decade of seventies.  These poems were expressions of 
anguish that the Dalit masses continued to face even after twenty 
years of independence. But they were also full of hope for the future, a 
future that Dalit groups wished to shape for themselves. You are aware 
of Dr. Ambedkar’s vision of socio-economic change and his relentless 
struggle for a dignified future for Dalits outside the Hindu caste-based 
social structure.  It is not surprising that Dr. Ambedkar remains an 
iconic and inspirational figure in much of Dalit liberation writings.
Origins
By the early nineteen seventies, the first generation Dalit graduates, 
especially those living in city slums began to assert themselves from 
various platforms. Dalit Panthers, a militant organisation of the Dalit 
youth, was formed in Maharashtra in 1972 as a part of these assertions. 
In the post-Independence period, Dalit groups were mainly fighting 
against the perpetual caste based inequalities and material injustices 
that the Dalits faced in spite of constitutional guarantees of equality 
and justice. Effective implementation of reservations and other such 
policies of social justice was one of their prominent demands. 
You know that the Indian Constitution abolished the practice 
of untouchability. The government passed laws to that effect in the 
1960s and 1970s. And yet, social discrimination and violence against the 
Namdeo Dhasal 
Turning their backs to the sun, they journeyed through centuries.
Now, now we must refuse to be pilgrims of darkness.
That one, our father, carrying, carrying the darkness is now bent;
Now, now we must lift the burden from his back.
Our blood was spilled for this glorious city
And what we got was the right to eat stones
Now, now we must explode the building that kisses the sky!
After a thousand years we were blessed with sunflower giving fakir;
Now, now, we must like sunflowers turn our faces to the sun.
English translation by Jayant Karve and Eleanor Zelliot of Namdeo Dhasal’s 
Marathi poem in Golpitha.
Has the 
condition of 
Dalits changed much 
since that time? I keep 
reading about atrocities 
against Dalits. Did these 
movements fail? Or is it 
the failure of the entire 
society?
2018-19
Rise o  Popular Movements     
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       133  
ex-untouchable 
groups 
continued 
in 
various 
ways. Dalit settlements in 
villages continued to be 
set apart from the main 
village. They were denied 
access to common source 
of drinking water. Dalit 
women were dishonoured 
and abused and worst of 
all, Dalits faced collective 
atrocities 
over 
minor, 
symbolic issues of caste 
pride. Legal mechanisms 
proved inadequate to stop 
the economic and social 
oppression of Dalits. On 
the other hand, political 
parties 
supported 
by 
the 
Dalits, 
like 
the 
Republican Party of India, 
were not successful in 
electoral politics. These 
parties always remained 
marginal; had to ally with 
some other party in order 
to win elections and faced 
constant splits. Therefore 
the 
Dalit 
Panthers 
resorted to mass action 
for assertion of Dalits’ 
rights.
Activities
Activities of Dalit Panthers mostly centred around fighting increasing atrocities on Dalits in 
various parts of the State. As a result of sustained agitations on the part of Dalit Panthers 
along with other like minded organisations over the issue of atrocities against Dalits, the 
government passed a comprehensive law in 1989 that provided for rigorous punishment for 
such acts. The larger ideological agenda of the Panthers was to destroy the caste system and 
to build an organisation of all oppressed sections like the landless poor peasants and urban 
industrial workers along with Dalits. 
The movement provided a platform for Dalit educated youth to use their creativity as a 
protest activity. Dalit writers protested against the brutalities of the caste system in their 
numerous autobiographies and other literary works published during this period. These works 
portraying the life experiences of the most downtrodden social sections of Indian society sent 
shock waves in Marathi literary world, made literature more broad based and representative 
of different social sections and initiated contestations in the cultural realm. In the post-
Emergency period, Dalit Panthers got involved in electoral compromises; it also underwent 
Credit: Anhad and NCDHR
‘Apartheid’, meaning ‘separateness’, refers to the official policy of racial 
discrimination which existed in South Africa during the 20th century. 
Why is it called Hidden Apartheid here? Are there other examples of this?
2018-19
134                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
many splits, which led to its decline. Organisations like the Backward 
and Minority Communities’ Employees Federation (BAMCEF) took 
over this space.
Bharatiya Kisan Union
The social discontent in Indian society since the seventies was 
manifold. Even those sections that partially benefited in the process 
of development had many complaints against the state and political 
parties. Agrarian struggles of the eighties is one such example where 
better off farmers protested against the policies of the state.
Growth
In January 1988, around twenty thousand farmers had gathered in 
the city of Meerut, Uttar Pradesh. They were protesting against the 
government decision to increase electricity rates. The farmers camped 
for about three weeks outside the district collector’s office until their 
demands were fulfilled. It was a very disciplined agitation of the farmers 
and all those days they received regular food supply from the nearby 
villages. The Meerut agitation was seen as a great show of rural power 
–  power of farmer cultivators. These agitating farmers were members 
of the Bharatiya Kisan Union (BKU), an organisation of farmers from 
western Uttar Pradesh and Haryana regions. The BKU was one of the 
leading organisations in the farmers’ movement of the eighties.
We have noted in Chapter Three that farmers of Haryana, Punjab 
and western Uttar Pradesh had benefited in the late 1960s from the 
state policies of ‘green revolution’. Sugar and wheat became the main 
cash crops in the region since then. The cash crop market faced a crisis 
in mid-eighties due to the beginning of the process of liberalisation of 
Indian economy. The BKU demanded higher government floor prices 
for sugarcane and wheat, abolition of 
A Bhartiya Kisan Union Rally in Punjab.
Credit: Hindustan Times
restrictions on the inter-state movement 
of farm produce, guaranteed supply of 
electricity at reasonable rates, waiving 
of repayments due on loans to farmers 
and the provision of a government 
pension for farmers. 
Similar demands were made by other 
farmers’ organisations in the country. 
Shetkari Sanghatana of Maharashtra 
declared the farmers’ movement as 
a war of Bharat (symbolising rural, 
agrarian sector) against forces of India 
(urban industrial sector). You have 
already studied in Chapter Three 
that the debate between industry and 
2018-19
Rise o  Popular Movements     
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       135  
 ✁
✂
✄
☎
✆
✝
✞
✟
✟
✠
✡
☎
☎
☛
☞
✌
✡
✍
✎
☛
✍
✝
✏
✑
✒
✓
✔
✕
✖
✗
✕
✘
✙
✚
✛
✙
✜
✢
✣
✤
✥
✦
✧
✦
★
✩
✪
✦
✫
✩
✬
✦
✭
✮
✭
✩
✯
✭
✥
✦
✬
✰
✦
✧
✭
✱
✲
✯
✳
✬
✯
✴
✩
✯
✵
✱
✴
✯
✭
✯
✶
✩
✴
✷
✸
✥
✱
✦
✹
✦
✺
✬
✩
✭
★
✥
✱
✴
✯
✷
✭
★
✧
✪
✩
✳
✻
✭
✲
✩
✦
✲
✯
✱
✬
✭
✯
★
✼
✦
✧
✽
✦
✩
✭
★
✯
✾
✱
✱
✸
✦
✽
✧
✩
✴
✷
✺
★
✷
✧
✱
✯
✷
★
✯
✳
★
✥
✱
✸
✷
✧
✹
✩
✱
✰
✯
✳
★
✥
✱
✿
✯
✧
✺
✲
❀
✧
✦
✲
✱
❁
✧
✽
✦
✭
✩
✬
✦
★
✩
✯
✭
❂
✿
❀
❁
❃
❄
❅
✲
✲
✧
✱
✬
✬
✩
✭
✽
✦
✸
✧
✱
✬
✬
✴
✯
✭
✳
✱
✧
✵
✱
✭
✴
✱
✥
✱
✧
✱
★
✯
✲
✦
✪
❆
★
✥
✱
✴
✥
✩
✱
✳
✯
✳
★
✥
✱
✷
✭
✩
✯
✭
❆
❇
✦
✥
✱
✭
✲
✧
✦
❈
✩
✭
✽
✥
❀
✩
✾
✦
✩
★
❆
✦
✭
✲
✩
★
✬
✭
✦
✵
★
✩
✯
✭
✦
✺
✴
✯
✯
✧
✲
✩
✭
✦
★
✩
✭
✽
✴
✯
✶
✵
✶
✩
★
★
✱
✱
✴
✯
✭
✹
✱
✭
✱
✧
❆
❇
❄
❉
✷
✲
✥
✵
✹
✱
✱
✧
❈
✩
✭
✽
✥
❆
✰
✦
✧
✭
✱
✲
✯
✳
★
✥
✱
✩
✶
✸
✱
✭
✲
✩
✭
✽
✲
✦
✭
✽
✱
✧
✬
✩
✳
✻
✭
✵
✲
✩
✦
✽
✯
✱
✬
✦
✥
✱
✦
✲
✦
✭
✲
✦
✽
✧
✱
✱
✬
★
✯
★
✥
✱
✬
★
✩
✸
✷
✺
✦
★
✩
✯
✭
✬
✯
✳
★
✥
✱
✿
❀
❁
✩
✭
★
✥
✱
✭
✱
❊
★
✧
✯
✷
✭
✲
✯
✳
✶
✱
✱
★
✩
✭
✽
✬
✴
✥
✱
✲
✷
✺
✱
✲
★
✯
✼
✱
✥
✱
✺
✲
✩
✭
❋
✯
✭
✽
✫
✯
✭
✽
✩
✭
●
✯
✵
✹
✱
✶
✼
✱
✧
❄
❀
✥
✱
✺
✱
✦
✲
✱
✧
✬
✬
✦
✩
✲
✦
✳
✦
✧
✶
✱
✧
✬
❍
✧
✦
✺
✺
✪
✰
✩
✺
✺
✼
✱
★
✦
✾
✱
✭
✯
✷
★
✩
✭
●
✱
✰
■
✱
✺
✥
✩
✯
✭
❇
✦
✧
✴
✥
❏
❑
★
✯
✸
✧
✱
✬
✬
✷
✧
✱
★
✥
✱
▲
✯
✹
✱
✧
✭
✵
✶
✱
✭
★
★
✯
✾
✱
✱
✸
✦
✽
✧
✩
✴
✷
✺
★
✷
✧
✱
✯
✷
★
✯
✳
★
✥
✱
✸
✷
✧
✹
✩
✱
✰
✯
✳
★
✥
✱
✿
❀
❁
❄
❇
✯
✧
✱
★
✥
✦
✭
▼
✹
✱
✺
✦
✾
✥
✳
✦
✧
✶
✱
✧
✬
✳
✧
✯
✶
✦
✺
✺
✯
✹
✱
✧
✻
✭
✲
✩
✦
✦
✧
✱
✱
❊
✸
✱
✴
★
✱
✲
★
✯
✦
★
★
✱
✭
✲
★
✥
✱
✧
✦
✺
✺
✪
❄
❈
✷
✼
✬
✱
◆
✷
✱
✭
★
✺
✪
❆
★
✥
✱
✦
✽
✩
★
✦
★
✩
✯
✭
✰
✩
✺
✺
✼
✱
✩
✭
★
✱
✭
✬
✩
✵
▼
✱
✲
✦
✴
✧
✯
✬
✬
★
✥
✱
✴
✯
✷
✭
★
✧
✪
❄
     The Hindu, Feb 16, 2005
agriculture has been one of the prominent issues in India’s model of 
development. The same debate came alive once again in the eighties 
when the agricultural sector came under threat due to economic 
policies of liberalisation.
Characteristics
Activities conducted by the BKU to pressurise the state for accepting 
its demands included rallies, demonstrations, sit-ins, and jail bharo 
(courting imprisonment) agitations. These protests involved tens of 
thousands of farmers –  sometimes over a lakh –  from various villages 
in western Uttar Pradesh and adjoining regions. Throughout the 
decade of eighties, the BKU organised massive rallies of these farmers 
in many district headquarters of the State and also at the national 
capital. Another novel aspect of these mobilisations was the use of 
caste linkages of farmers. Most of the BKU members belonged to a 
single community. The organisation used traditional caste panchayats 
of these communities in bringing them together over economic issues. 
In spite of lack of any formal organisation, the BKU could sustain 
itself for a long time because it was based on clan networks among 
its members. Funds, resources and activities of BKU were mobilised 
through these networks.  
Until the early nineties, the BKU distanced itself from all political 
parties. It operated as a pressure group in politics with its strength 
of sheer numbers. The organisation, along with the other farmers’ 
organisations across States, did manage to get some of their economic 
demands accepted. The farmers’ movement became one of the most 
successful social movements of the ’eighties in this respect. The 
success of the movement was an outcome of political bargaining 
powers that its members possessed. The movement was active mainly 
in the prosperous States of the country. Unlike most of the Indian 
farmers who engage in agriculture for subsistence, members of the 
organisations like the 
BKU grew cash crops 
for the market. Like 
the BKU, farmers’ 
organisations across 
States recruited 
their members from 
communities that 
dominated regional 
electoral politics. 
Shetkari Sanghatana 
of Maharashtra 
and Rayata Sangha 
of Karnataka, are 
prominent examples 
of such organisations 
of the farmers. 
I have 
never met anyone 
who says he wishes 
to be a farmer. Don’t 
we need farmers in 
the country?
2018-19
136                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
National Fish Workers’ Forum
Do you know that the Indian fishers constitute the second largest fishing population 
in the world? Both in the eastern and the western coastal areas of our country 
hundreds of thousands of families, mainly belonging to the indigenous fishermen 
communities, are engaged in the occupation of fishing. These fish workers’ lives 
were threatened in a major way when the government permitted entry to mechanised 
trawlers and technologies like bottom trawling for large-scale harvest of fish in the 
Indian seas. Throughout the seventies and eighties, local fish workers’ organisations 
fought with the State governments over the issues of their livelihood. Fisheries being 
a State subject, the fish workers were mostly mobilised at the regional level. 
With the coming of policies of economic liberalisation in and around the mid ’eighties, 
these organisations were compelled to come together on a national level platform- 
the NFF or National Fishworkers’ Forum. Fish workers from Kerala took the main 
responsibility of mobilising fellow workers, including women workers from other 
States. Work of the NFF consolidated when in 1991 it fought its first legal battle with 
the Union government successfully. This was about the government’s deep sea 
fishing policy that opened up India’s waters to large commercial vessels including 
those of the multinational fishing companies. Throughout the nineties the NFF 
fought various legal and public battles with the government. It worked to protect the 
interests of those who rely on fishing for subsistence rather than those who invest 
in the sector for profit. In July 2002, NFF called for a nationwide strike to oppose the 
move of the government to issue licenses to foreign trawlers. The NFF joined hands 
with organisations all over the world for protecting ecology and for protecting lives 
of the fish workers.  
Credit: Hindu
136                                                              
2018-19
Rise o  Popular Movements     
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       137  7
Anti-Ar ack Movement
When the BKU was mobilising the farmers of the 
north, an altogether different kind of mobilisation in 
the rural areas was taking shape in the southern State 
of Andhra Pradesh. It was a spontaneous mobilisation 
of women demanding a ban on the sale of alcohol in 
their neighbourhoods.  
Stories 
of 
this 
kind 
appeared in the Telugu press 
almost daily during the two 
months of September and 
October 1992. The name of 
the village would change in 
each case but the story was 
the same. Rural women in 
remote villages from the State 
of Andhra Pradesh fought a 
battle against alcoholism, 
against mafias and against 
the government during this 
period. 
These 
agitations 
shaped what was known as 
the anti-arrack movement in 
the State.
❖
P
◗
❘
❙
❚
◗
❯
❙
❱
❲
❳
❨
❨
❩
❬
◗
❭
❪
❯
❫
❨
❪
❴
❳
❯
❵
❩
❨
❳
❛
❩
❴
❳
❚
❩
❯
❫
❩
❨
❙
❱
❜
P
❳
❝
❝
❙
❙
❴
❫
❳
❞
❝
❴
❳
❡
❝
❩
❞
❞
◗
❚
❢
❨
◗
❫
❩
❯
❫
❴
◗
❞
❙
❨
❲
◗
❫
❝
❙
❣
❪
❝
❩
❯
◗
❯
❫
❝
❙
❝
P
◗
❞
❩
❨
◗
❙
❱
❩
❴
❴
❩
❡
❛
❳
❯
❝
P
◗
❳
❴
❲
❳
❨
❨
❩
❬
◗
❤
❖
P
◗
✐
❡
❙
❯
❲
◗
✐
◗
❫
❝
P
❳
❞
❴
◗
❞
❙
❨
❪
❝
❳
❙
❯
❝
❙
❝
P
◗
❲
❳
❨
❨
❩
❬
◗
❩
❴
❴
❩
❡
❛
❲
◗
❯
❫
❙
❴
❤
❖
P
◗
✐
❝
❪
❴
❯
◗
❫
❢
❩
❡
❛
❝
P
◗
❥
◗
◗
❣
❝
P
❩
❝
❢
❴
❙
❪
❬
P
❝
❩
❴
❴
❩
❡
❛
❣
❩
❡
❛
◗
❝
❞
❝
❙
❝
P
◗
❲
❳
❨
❨
❩
❬
◗
❤
❦
❙
❘
◗
❲
◗
❴
❧
❘
P
◗
❯
❝
P
◗
❲
❳
❨
❨
❩
❬
◗
❩
❴
❴
❩
❡
❛
❲
◗
❯
❫
❙
❴
❳
❯
❱
❙
❴
❚
◗
❫
❝
P
◗
❡
❙
❯
❝
❴
❩
❡
❝
❙
❴
❩
❢
❙
❪
❝
❝
P
❳
❞
❧
❝
P
◗
❡
❙
❯
❝
❴
❩
❡
❝
❙
❴
❞
◗
❯
❝
P
❳
❚
❩
❬
❩
❯
❬
❙
❱
❚
◗
❯
❝
❙
P
◗
❨
❣
P
❳
❚
❴
◗
❞
❪
❚
◗
❞
❩
❨
◗
❞
❤
♠
❙
❚
◗
❯
❙
❱
❝
P
◗
❲
❳
❨
❨
❩
❬
◗
❘
◗
❴
◗
❩
❫
❩
❚
❩
❯
❝
❩
❯
❫
❙
❣
❣
❙
❞
◗
❫
❝
P
❳
❞
❚
❙
❲
◗
❤
❖
P
◗
❡
❙
❯
❝
❴
❩
❡
❝
❙
❴
❡
❩
❨
❨
◗
❫
❳
❯
❝
P
◗
❣
❙
❨
❳
❡
◗
❢
❪
❝
◗
❲
◗
❯
❝
P
◗
✐
P
❩
❫
❝
❙
❢
◗
❩
❝
❩
❴
◗
❝
❴
◗
❩
❝
❤
♥
❘
◗
◗
❛
❨
❩
❝
◗
❴
❧
❘
❙
❚
◗
❯
❘
P
❙
❣
❴
◗
❲
◗
❯
❝
◗
❫
❝
P
◗
❞
❩
❨
◗
❙
❱
❩
❴
❴
❩
❡
❛
❘
◗
❴
◗
❩
❞
❞
❩
❪
❨
❝
◗
❫
❢
✐
❩
❴
❴
❩
❡
❛
❡
❙
❯
❝
❴
❩
❡
❝
❙
❴
♦
❞
❬
❙
❙
❯
❫
❩
❞
❘
❳
❝
P
❳
❴
❙
❯
❴
❙
❫
❞
❩
❯
❫
❙
❝
P
◗
❴
❨
◗
❝
P
❩
❨
❘
◗
❩
❣
❙
❯
❞
❤
♣
❪
❝
❘
P
◗
❯
❝
P
◗
❘
❙
❚
◗
❯
❴
◗
❞
❳
❞
❝
◗
❫
❝
P
◗
❩
❞
❞
❩
❪
❨
❝
❪
❯
❳
❝
◗
❫
❨
✐
❧
❝
P
◗
P
❳
❴
◗
❫
❚
❩
❱
❳
❩
❝
❙
❙
❛
❝
❙
❝
P
◗
❳
❴
P
◗
◗
❨
❞
❤
❖
P
◗
❘
❙
❚
◗
❯
❨
❩
❝
◗
❴
❫
◗
❞
❝
❴
❙
✐
◗
❫
❝
P
❴
◗
◗
❥
◗
◗
❣
❞
❱
❪
❨
❨
❙
❱
❩
❴
❴
❩
❡
❛
❤
q
r
s
t
✉
✈
✇
r
①
t
②
✈
①
③
④
✇
⑤
t
✇
r
✉
⑥
⑦
⑧
⑨
③
✈
⑩
t
①
❶
❷
⑦
❸
❷
❷
❶
❹
We 
hear all 
these nice 
stories, but they 
never tell us how 
these ended. Did 
this movement put 
an end to drinking? 
Or did the men go 
back to it after 
some time?
Credit: Zuban
Credit: Zuban
2018-19
138                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
Origins
In a village in the interior of Dubagunta in Nellore district of Andhra 
Pradesh, women had enrolled in the Adult Literacy Drive on a large 
scale in the early nineteen nineties. It is during the discussion in 
the class that women complained of increased consumption of a 
locally brewed alcohol –  arrack –  by men in their families. The habit 
of alcoholism had taken deep roots among the village people and was 
ruining their physical and mental health. It affected the rural economy 
of the region a great deal. Indebtedness grew with increasing scales of 
consumption of alcohol, men remained absent from their jobs and the 
contractors of alcohol engaged in crime for securing their monopoly 
over the arrack trade. Women were the worst sufferers of these ill-
effects of alcohol as it resulted in the collapse of the family economy 
and women had to bear the brunt of violence from the male family 
members, particularly the husband.
Women in Nellore came together 
in spontaneous local initiatives to 
protest against arrack and forced 
closure of the wine shop. The news 
spread fast and women of about 5000 
villages got inspired and met together 
in meetings, passed resolutions for 
imposing prohibition and sent them 
to the District Collector. The arrack 
auctions in Nellore district were 
postponed 17 times. This movement in 
Nellore District slowly spread all over 
the State. 
Linkages
The slogan of the anti-arrack movement was simple — prohibition on 
the sale of arrack. But this simple demand touched upon larger social, 
economic and political issues of the region that affected women’s life. 
A close nexus between crime and politics was established around the 
business of arrack. The State government collected huge revenues 
by way of taxes imposed on the sale of arrack and was therefore not 
willing to impose a ban. Groups of local women tried to address these 
complex issues in their agitation against arrack. They also openly 
discussed the issue of domestic violence. Their movement, for the 
first time, provided a platform to discuss private issues of domestic 
violence. Thus, the anti-arrack movement also became part of the 
women’s movement. 
Earlier, women’s groups working on issues of domestic violence, 
the custom of dowry, sexual abuse at work and public places were 
active mainly among urban middle class women in different parts of 
the country. Their work led to a realisation that issues of injustice 
Women taking out 
procession in Hyderabad 
in 1992, protesting 
against the selling of 
arrack.
Credit: The Hindu
2018-19
Rise o  Popular Movements     
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       139  
to women and of gender inequalities 
were complicated in nature. During 
the decade of the eighties women’s 
movement focused on issues of sexual 
violence against women –  within the 
family and outside. These groups ran a 
campaign against the system of dowry 
and demanded personal and property 
laws based on the norms of gender 
equality.
These campaigns contributed a great 
deal in increasing overall social awareness 
about women’s questions. Focus of the 
women’s movement gradually shifted from 
legal reforms to open social confrontations 
like the one we discussed above. As a 
result the movement made demands of 
equal representation to women in politics 
during the nineties. We know that 73rd 
and 74th amendments have granted 
reservations to women in local level 
political offices. Demands for extending 
similar reservations in State and Central 
legislatures have also been made. A 
constitution amendment bill to this effect 
has been proposed but has not received 
enough support from the Parliament 
yet. Main opposition to the bill has come 
from groups, including some women’s 
groups, who are insisting on a separate 
quota for Dalit and OBC women within 
the proposed women’s quota in higher 
political offices.   
Let’s watch a Film
AAKROSH
The lawyer Bhaskar Kulkarni 
is assigned a legal aid case to 
represent Bhiku Lahanya, an 
Adivasi who is charged with 
murdering his wife. The lawyer 
tries hard to find out the cause 
of the killing but the accused is 
determinedly silent and so is his 
family. The lawyer’s perseverance 
leads to an attack on him and also 
a tip off by a social worker about 
what had happened.
But the social worker disappears 
and Bhiku’s  father dies. Bhiku is 
permitted to attend the funeral 
of his father. It is here that Bhiku 
breaks down and the ‘Aakrosh’ 
(screaming cry) erupts….This 
hard hitting film depicts the sub-
human life of the oppressed 
and the uphill task facing any 
intervention 
against 
dominant 
social powers.
Year: 1980
Director: Govind Nihlani
Story: Vijay Tendulkar
Screenplay: Satyadev Dubey
Actors: Naseeruddin Shah, Om 
Puri, Smita Patil, Nana Patekar, 
Mahesh Elkunchwar
Women’s demonstration in favour of anti-dowry act.
Credit: India Today
2018-19
140                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
Narmada Bachao Aandolan
Social movements that we discussed so far raised various 
issues about the model of economic development that India 
had adopted at the time of Independence. Chipko movement 
brought out the issue of ecological depletion whereas 
the farmers complained of neglect of agricultural sector. 
Social and material conditions of Dalits led to their mass 
struggles whereas the anti-arrack movement focused on 
the negative fallouts of what was considered development. 
The issue implicit in all these movements was made 
explicit by the movements against displacement caused 
by huge developmental projects. 
Sardar Sarovar Project
An ambitious developmental project was launched 
in the Narmada valley of central India in early 
’eighties. The project consisted of 30 big dams, 135 
medium sized and around 3,000 small dams to be 
constructed on the Narmada and its tributaries 
that flow across three states of Madhya Pradesh, 
Gujarat and Maharashtra. Sardar Sarovar Project 
in Gujarat and the Narmada Sagar Project in 
Madhya Pradesh were two of the most important 
and biggest, multi-purpose dams planned under 
the project. Narmada Bachao Aandolan, a movement to save 
Narmada, opposed the construction of these dams and questioned 
the nature of ongoing developmental projects in the country.
Sardar Sarovar Project is a multipurpose mega-scale dam.  Its 
advocates say that it would benefit huge areas of Gujarat and the 
three adjoining states in terms of availability of drinking water 
and water for irrigation, generation of electricity and increase in 
agricultural production. Many more subsidiary benefits like effective 
flood and drought control in the region were linked to the success of 
this dam. In the process of construction of the dam 245 villages from 
these States were expected to get submerged. It required relocation 
of around two and a half lakh people from these villages. Issues of 
relocation and proper rehabilitation of the project-affected people were 
first raised by local activist groups. It was around 1988-89 that the 
issues crystallised under the banner of the NBA –  a loose collective of 
local voluntary organisations.
Debates and struggles
Since its inception the NBA linked its opposition to the Sardar 
Sarovar Project with larger issues concerning the nature of ongoing 
developmental projects, efficacy of the model of development that 
Social m
issues
had ad
broug
the fa
Socia
strug
the n
The
exp
by
S
A
in
’
the proje
Narmada, oppos
A poster in support 
of Narmada Bachao 
Andolan.
Credit: Design and People
2018-19
Rise o  Popular Movements     
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       141  
the country followed and about 
what constituted public interest 
in a democracy. It demanded 
that there should be a cost-
benefit 
analysis 
of 
the 
major developmental projects 
completed in the country so 
far. The movement argued 
that larger social costs of 
the developmental projects 
must be calculated in such 
an 
analysis. 
The 
social 
costs included forced resettlement 
of the project-affected people, a serious loss of 
their means of livelihood and culture and depletion of ecological 
resources. 
Initially the movement demanded proper and just rehabilitation 
of all those who were directly or indirectly affected by the project. The 
movement also questioned the nature of decision-making processes 
that go in the making of mega scale developmental projects. The NBA 
insisted that local communities must have a say in such decisions 
and they should also have effective control over natural resources 
like water, land and forests. The movement also asked why, in a 
democracy, should some people be made to sacrifice for benefiting 
others. All these considerations led the NBA to shift from its initial 
demand for rehabilitation to its position of total opposition to the 
dam.
Arguments and agitations of the movement met vociferous opposition 
in the States benefiting from the project, especially in Gujarat. At the 
same time, the point about 
right 
to 
rehabilitation 
has 
been now recognised by the 
government and the judiciary. 
A 
comprehensive 
National 
Rehabilitation Policy formed 
by the government in 2003 can 
be seen as an achievement of 
the movements like the NBA. 
However, its demand to stop 
the construction of the dam 
was severely criticised by 
many as obstructing the 
process 
of 
development, 
denying access to water and 
to economic development 
for many.  The Supreme 
o
th
w
in
t
b
costs
ut
s
e
.
l
I have 
never heard of 
posh colonies and 
cities being demolished 
for any developmental 
project. Why is it always 
the Adivasis and the 
poor who are asked 
to leave their 
homes?
Top:
NBA leader Medha 
Patkar and other 
activists in Jalsamadhi 
(protesting in rising 
waters) in 2002.
Bottom: 
A boat ralley organised 
by NBA.
Credit: NBA
Credit: NBA
2018-19
142                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
Court upheld the government’s decision to go ahead with the 
construction of the dam while also instructing to ensure proper 
rehabilitation.
Narmada Bachao Aandolan continued a sustained agitation for 
more than twenty years. It used every available democratic strategy 
to put forward its demands. These included appeals to the judiciary, 
mobilisation of support at the international level, public rallies 
in support of the movement and a revival of forms of Satyagraha 
to convince people about the movement’s position. However, the 
movement could not garner much support among the mainstream 
political parties –  including the opposition parties. In fact, the journey 
of the Narmada Bachao Aandolan depicted a gradual process of 
disjunction between political parties and social movements in Indian 
politics.  By the end of the ’nineties, however, the NBA was not alone. 
There emerged many local groups and movements that challenged the 
logic of large scale developmental projects in their areas. Around this 
time, the NBA became part of a larger alliance of people’s movements 
that are involved in struggles for similar issues in different regions of 
the country.
Le  ons f om popular movements
The history of these popular movements helps us to understand 
better the nature of democratic politics. We have seen that these 
non-party movements are neither sporadic in nature nor are these a 
problem. These movements came up to rectify some problems in the 
functioning of party politics and should be seen as integral part of 
our democratic politics. They represented new social groups whose 
economic and social grievances were not redressed in the realm of 
electoral politics. Popular movements ensured effective representation 
of diverse groups and their demands.  This reduced the possibility of 
deep social conflict and disaffection of these groups from democracy. 
Popular movements suggested new forms of active participation and 
thus broadened the idea of participation in Indian democracy. 
Critics of these movements often argue that collective actions like 
strikes, sit-ins and rallies disrupt the functioning of the government, 
delay decision making and destabilise the routines of democracy. 
Such an argument invites a deeper question: why do these movements 
resort to such assertive forms of action? We have seen in this 
chapter that popular movements have raised legitimate demands of 
the people and have involved large scale participation of citizens. It 
should be noted that the groups mobilised by these movements are 
poor, socially and economically disadvantaged sections of the society 
from marginal social groups. The frequency and the methods used 
by the movements suggest that the routine functioning of democracy 
did not have enough space for the voices of these social groups. That 
Can 
we say that 
movements are 
like laboratories 
of politics? New 
experiments are 
carried out here and 
the successful ones 
are taken up by 
parties.
2018-19
Rise o  Popular Movements     
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       143  
Popular movements have produced a wide range of litrature, 
often in the form of small magazines. Here is a selcetion.
2018-19
144                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
Movement for Right to Information
The movement for Right to Information (RTI) is 
one of the few recent examples of a movement 
that did succeed in getting the state to accept 
its major demand. The movement started in 
1990, when a mass based organisation called 
the Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan (MKSS) in 
Rajasthan took the initiative in demanding records 
of famine relief work and accounts of labourers. 
The demand was first raised in Bhim Tehsil in a 
very backward region of Rajasthan. The villagers 
asserted their right to information by asking for 
copies of bills and vouchers and names of persons 
on the muster rolls who have been paid wages on 
the construction of schools, dispensaries, small 
dams and community centres. On paper such 
development projects were all completed, but it 
was common knowledge of the villagers that there 
was gross misappropriation of funds. In 1994 and 
1996, the MKSS organised Jan Sunwais or Public 
Hearings, where the administration was asked to 
explain its stand in public. 
The movement had a small success when they 
could force an amendment in the Rajasthan Panchayati Raj Act to permit the 
public to procure certified copies of documents held by the Panchayats. The 
Panchayats were also required to publish on a board and in newspapers the budget, 
accounts, expenditure, policies and beneficiaries. In 1996 MKSS formed National 
Council 
for 
People’s 
Right to Information in 
Delhi to raise RTI to 
the status of a national 
campaign. Prior to that, 
the Consumer Education 
and Research Center, 
the Press Council and 
the Shourie committee 
had proposed a draft 
RTI law. In 2002, a weak 
Freedom of Information 
Act was legislated but 
never came into force. In 
2004 RTI Bill was tabled 
and received presidential 
assent in June 2005. 
“Ghotala Rathyatra”, a popular 
theatre form evolved by MKSS. 
Credit: Pankaj Pushkar
Credit: Sudhir Tailang/UNDP and Planning Commission
2018-19
Rise o  Popular Movements     
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       145  
is perhaps why these groups turned to mass actions and mobilisations 
outside the electoral arena. 
This can be seen in the recent case of the new economic policies. As you 
will read in Chapter Nine, there is a growing consensus among political 
parties over the implementation of these policies. It follows that those 
marginal social groups who may be adversely affected by these policies 
get less and less attention from political parties as well as the media. 
Therefore, any effective protest against these policies involves assertive 
forms of action that are taken up by the popular movements outside the 
framework of political parties.
 Movements are not only about collective assertions or only about 
rallies and protests. They involve a gradual process of coming together of 
people with similar problems, similar demands and similar expectations. 
But then movements are also about making people aware of their rights 
and the expectations that they can have from democratic institutions. 
Social movements in India have been involved in these educative tasks for 
a long time and have thus contributed to expansion of democracy rather 
than causing disruptions. The struggle for the right to information is a 
case in point.
Yet the real life impact of these movements on the nature of public 
policies seems to be very limited. This is partly because most of the 
contemporary movements focus on a single issue and represent the 
interest of one section of society. Thus it becomes possible to ignore 
their reasonable demands. Democratic politics requires a broad alliance 
of various disadvantaged social groups. Such an alliance does not seem 
to be shaping under the leadership of these movements. Political parties 
are required to bring together different sectional interests, but they also 
seem to be unable to do so. Parties do not seem to be taking up issues of 
marginal social groups.  The movements that take up these issues operate 
in a very restrictive manner. The relationship between popular movements 
and political parties has grown weaker over the years, creating a vacuum 
in politics. In the recent years, this has become a major problem in Indian 
politics.
 Let’s re-search
Identify at least one popular movement in your city or district in the last 
25 years. Collect the following information about that movement.
•  
When did it start? How long did it last?
•  
Who were the main leaders? Which social groups supported   
the movement?
•  
What were the main issues or demands of the movement?
•  
Did it succeed? What was the long term effect of the movement  
in your area?
2018-19
146                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
 
  1.  Which of these statements are incorrect
        The Chipko Movement
(a) was an environmental movement to prevent cutting down of  
 
trees.
(b) raised questions of ecological and economic exploitation.
(c) 
was a movement against alcoholism started by the women
(d) demanded that local communities should have control over their  
natural resources
  2. Some of the statements below are incorrect. Identify the incorrect 
statements and rewrite those with necessary correction:
(a) Social movements are hampering the functioning of India’s 
democracy.
(b) The main strength of social movements lies in their mass base 
across social sections.
(c) 
Social movements in India emerged because there were many 
issues that political parties did not address.
  3.   Identify the reasons which led to the Chipko Movement in U.P in early 
1970s. What was the impact of this movement?
  4.   The Bharatiya Kisan Union is a leading organisation highlighting the 
plight of farmers. What were the issues addressed by it in the nineties 
and to what extent were they successful?
  5.   The anti-arrack movement in Andhra Pradesh drew the attention  of the 
country to some  serious issues. What were these issues? 
  6.  Would you consider the anti-arrack movement as a women’s movement? 
Why?
  7.  Why did the Narmada Bachao Aandolan oppose the dam projects in the 
Narmada Valley?
  8.  Do movements and protests in a country strengthen democracy? Justify 
your answer with examples.
  9.  What issues did the Dalit Panthers address? 
10.  Read the passage and answer questions below:
  
  …., nearly all ‘new social movements’ have emerged as corrective to 
new maladies – environmental degradation, violation of the status of 
women, destruction of tribal cultures and the undermining of human 
rights – none of which are in and by themselves transformative of the 
social order. They are in that way quite different from revolutionary 
ideologies of the past. But their weakness lies in their being so heavily 
fragmented. ……   ….  …….a large part of the space occupied by the new 
EXERCISES
146                                                                    Politics in India since Independence
2018-19
Rise o  Popular Movements     
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       147  
social movements seem to be suffering from .. various characteristics 
which have prevented them from being relevant to the truly oppressed 
and the poor in the form of a solid unified movement of the people. They 
are too fragmented, reactive, ad hocish, providing no comprehensive 
framework of basic social change. Their being anti-this or that (anti-
West, anti-capitalist, anti-development, etc) does not make them any 
more coherent, any more relevant to oppressed and peripheralized 
communities.  — RAJNI KOTHARI
(a) What is the difference between new social movements and 
revolutionary ideologies?
(b) What according to the author are the limitations of social 
movements?
(c) 
If social movements address specific issues, would you say that 
they are ‘fragmented’ or that they are more focused? Give reasons 
for your answer by giving examples.
Trace newspaper reports for a week and identify any three news stories 
you would classify as ‘Popular Movement’.   Find out the core demands 
of these movements; the methods used by them to pursue their demands 
and the response of political parties to these demands.                                                                          
LET US DO IT TOGETHER
Rise o  Popular Movements     
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       147  
2018-19
In this chapter…
In the first chapter of this book we studied the 
process of ‘nation-building’ in the first decade 
after Independence. But nation-building is 
not something that can be accomplished 
once and for all times to come. In the course 
of time new challenges came up. Some of the 
old problems had never been fully resolved. 
As democratic experiment unfolded, people 
from different regions began to express 
their aspirations for autonomy. Sometimes 
these aspirations were expressed outside 
the framework of the Indian union. These 
involved long struggles and often aggressive 
and armed assertions by the people. 
This new challenge came to the fore in the 
1980s, as the Janata experiment came to an 
end and there was some political stability at 
the centre. This decade will be remembered 
for some major conflicts and accords in the 
various regions of the country, especially 
in Assam, the Punjab, Mizoram and the 
developments in Jammu and Kashmir. In 
this chapter we study these cases so as to 
ask some general questions.
• 
Which factors contribute to the tensions 
arising out of regional aspirations? 
• 
How has the Indian state responded to 
these tensions and challenges?
• 
What kind of difficulties are faced in 
balancing democratic rights and national 
unity? 
• 
What are the lessons here for achieving 
unity with diversity in a democracy?
Regional aspirations 
are usually expressed 
in the language of the 
region and addressed 
to the local population 
or the rulers. This 
unusual poster from 
Uttarakhand movement 
appeals to all the 
Indian citizens in seven 
different languages 
and thus underscores 
the compatibility of the 
regional aspirations with 
nationalist sentiments. 
2018-19
8
chapter
regional 
aspirations
Region and the Nation
1980s may be seen as a period of rising regional aspirations for 
autonomy, often outside the framework of the Indian Union.  These 
movements frequently involved armed assertions by the people, 
their repression by the government, and a collapse of the political 
and electoral processes.  It is also not surprising that most of these 
struggles were long drawn and concluded in negotiated settlements 
or accords between the central government and the groups leading 
the movement for autonomy. The accords were reached after a 
process of dialogue that aimed to settle contentious issues within the 
constitutional framework.  Yet the journey to the accord was always 
tumultuous and often violent. 
Indian approach
In studying the Indian Constitution and the process of nation-building 
we have repeatedly come across one basic principle of the Indian 
approach to diversity – the Indian nation shall not deny the rights of 
different regions and linguistic groups to retain their own culture. We 
decided to live a united social life without losing the distinctiveness 
of the numerous cultures that constituted it.  Indian nationalism 
sought to balance the principles of unity and diversity. The nation 
would not mean the negation of the region. In this sense the Indian 
approach was very different from the one adopted in many European 
countries where they saw cultural diversity as a threat to the nation.
India adopted a democratic approach to the question of diversity. 
Democracy allows the political expressions of regional aspirations 
and does not look upon them as anti-national. 
Besides, democratic politics allows parties and groups 
to address the people on the basis of their regional 
identity, aspiration and specific regional problems. 
Thus, in the course of democratic politics, regional 
aspirations get strengthened. At the same time, 
democratic politics also means that regional issues 
and problems will receive adequate attention and 
accommodation in the policy making process.  
Such an arrangement may sometimes lead to 
tensions and problems. Sometimes, the concern for 
national unity may overshadow the regional needs 
Does it mean 
that regionalism is 
not as dangerous as 
communalism? Or may 
be, not dangerous at 
all?
2018-19
150                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
and aspirations.  At other times a concern for region alone may 
blind us to the larger needs of the nation. Therefore, political 
conflicts over issues of power of the regions, their rights and 
their separate existence are common to nations that want to 
respect diversity while trying to forge and retain unity. 
Areas of tension
In the first chapter you have seen how immediately after 
Independence our nation had to cope with many difficult issues 
like Partition, displacement, integration of Princely States, 
reorganisation of states and so on. Many observers, both within 
the country and from outside, had predicted that India as one 
unified country cannot last long. Soon after Independence, 
the issue of Jammu and Kashmir came up. It was not only a 
conflict between India and Pakistan. More than that, it was a 
question of the political aspirations of the people of Kashmir 
valley. Similarly, in some parts of the north-east, there was no 
consensus about being a part of India. First Nagaland and then 
Mizoram witnessed strong movements demanding separation 
from India. In the south, some groups from the Dravid movement 
briefly toyed with the idea of a separate country. 
These events were followed by mass agitations in many parts 
for the formation of linguistic States. Today’s Andhra Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Maharashtra, and Gujarat were among the regions 
affected by these agitations. In some parts of southern India, 
particularly Tamil Nadu, there were protests against making 
Hindi the official national language of the country. In the 
north, there were strong pro-Hindi agitations demanding that 
Hindi be made the official language immediately. From the late 
1950s, people speaking the Punjabi language started agitating 
for a separate State for themselves. This demand was finally 
accepted and the States of Punjab and Haryana were created 
in 1966. Later, the States of Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand and 
Jharkhand were created. Thus the challenge of diversity was 
met by redrawing the internal boundaries of the country.
Yet this did not lead to resolution of all problems and for 
all times. In some regions, like Kashmir and Nagaland, the 
challenge was so complex that it could not be resolved in the 
first phase of nation-building. Besides, new challenges came 
up in States like Punjab, Assam and Mizoram. Let us study 
these cases in some detail. In this process let us also go back 
to some of the earlier instances of difficulties of nation building. 
The successes and failures in these cases are instructive not 
merely for a study of our past, but also for an understanding 
of India’s future.
Why does the 
challenge always 
come from the border 
States? 
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       151  
Jammu and Kashmir
You may have heard about the 
violence in Jammu and Kashmir 
(J&K). This has resulted in 
the loss of many lives and the 
displacement of many families. 
The ‘Kashmir issue’ is always 
seen as a major issue between 
India and Pakistan. But the 
political situation in the State 
has many dimensions. 
Jammu 
and 
Kashmir 
comprises 
three 
social 
and 
political 
regions: 
Jammu, 
Kashmir and Ladakh. The heart 
of the Kashmir region is the 
Kashmir valley; the people are 
Kashmiri speaking and mostly 
Muslim with a small Kashmiri 
speaking 
Hindu 
minority. 
Jammu region is a mix of 
foothills and plains, of Hindus, 
Muslims and Sikhs and speakers of various languages. The Ladakh 
region is mountainous, has very little population which is equally 
divided between Buddhists and Muslims.
The ‘Kashmir issue’ is not just a dispute between India and 
Pakistan. This issue has external and internal dimensions. It 
involves the issue of Kashmiri identity known as Kashmiriyat and the 
aspirations of the people of J&K for political autonomy. 
Roots of the problem
Before 1947, Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) was a Princely State.  Its 
Hindu ruler, Hari Singh, did not want to merge with India and tried to 
negotiate with India and Pakistan to have an independent status for 
his state. The Pakistani leaders thought the Kashmir region ‘belonged’ 
to Pakistan, since majority population of the State was Muslim. 
But this is not how the people themselves saw it – they thought of 
themselves as Kashmiris above all.  The popular movement in the 
State, led by Sheikh Abdullah of the National Conference, wanted to 
get rid of the Maharaja, but was against joining Pakistan. The National 
Conference was a secular organisation and had a long association 
with the Congress. Sheikh Abdullah was a personal friend of some of 
the leading nationalist leaders including Nehru. 
In October 1947, Pakistan sent tribal infiltrators from its side 
to capture Kashmir. This forced the Maharaja to ask for Indian 
military help. India extended the military support and drove back 
In that 
case, why don’t 
they rename the 
State as “Jammu, 
Kashmir and Ladakh”? 
Besides, JKL makes 
for an easy 
abbreviation!
Note: This illustration 
is not a map drawn to 
scale and should not be 
taken to be an authentic 
depiction of India’s 
external boundaries. 
2018-19
152                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
Dravidian movement
‘Vadakku Vaazhkirathu; Therkku Thaeikirathu’ 
[The north thrives even as the south decays]. 
This popular slogan sums up the dominant 
sentiments of one of India’s most effective 
regional movements, the Dravidian movement, 
at one point of time. This was one of the 
first regional movements in Indian politics. 
Though some sections of this movement 
had ambitions of creating a Dravida nation, 
the movement did not take to arms.  It used 
democratic means like public debates and the 
electoral platform to achieve its ends. This 
strategy paid off as the movement acquired 
political power in the State and also became 
influential at the national level. 
The Dravidian movement led to the formation of 
Dravidar Kazhagam [DK] under the leadership 
of  Tamil social reformer E.V. Ramasami 
‘Periyar’. The organisation strongly opposed 
the Brahmins’ dominance and affirmed 
regional pride against the political, economic 
and cultural domination of the North. Initially, 
the Dravidian movement spoke in terms of
the whole of south India; however lack of support from other States limited the 
movement to Tamil Nadu.
The DK split and the political legacy of the 
movement was transferred to Dravida 
Munnetra 
Kazhagam 
(DMK). The DMK made 
its entry into politics 
with a three pronged 
agitation 
in 
1953-54. 
First, it demanded the 
restoration of the original 
name of Kallakudi railway 
station which had been 
renamed 
Dalmiapuram, 
after an industrial house 
from the North.  This demand 
brought out its opposition to 
the North Indian economic 
and cultural symbols. The 
second 
agitation 
was 
for 
pololitititicicicalalalalalal
leg
eg
eg
e ac
ac
ac
ac
acy y y
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
o
the
he
he
h
d to 
o Dr
Dr
D av
av
avididida 
a 
a 
a
, 
e 
e
d 
to 
o
mi
mic
Th
The 
e 
e
for
or
o  
E.V. 
Ramasami 
Naicker 
(1879-1973): 
Known as 
Periyar (the 
respected); 
strong 
supporter of 
atheism; famous for his anti-
caste struggle and rediscovery 
of Dravidian identity; initially 
a worker of the Congress 
party; started the self-respect 
movement (1925); led the 
anti-Brahmin movement; 
worked for the Justice party 
and later founded Dravidar 
Kazhagam; opposed to Hindi 
and domination of north India; 
propounded the thesis that 
north Indians and Brahmins 
are Aryans.
Anti-Hindi agitation in Tamil Nadu, 1965
Credit: The Hindu
152                                                                 
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       153  
giving Tamil cultural history greater importance in school curricula. 
The third agitation was against the craft education scheme of the State 
government, which it alleged was linked to the Brahmanical social 
outlook. It also agitated against making Hindi the country’s official 
language. The success of the anti-Hindi agitation of 1965 added to the 
DMK’s popularity.
Sustained political agitations brought the DMK to power in the Assembly 
elections of 1967. Since then, the Dravidian parties have dominated 
the politics of Tamil Nadu. Though  the DMK split after the death of 
its leader, C. Annadurai,  the influence of Dravidian parties in Tamil 
politics actually increased. After the split there were two parties – the 
DMK and the All India Anna DMK (AIADMK) – that claimed Dravidian 
legacy. Both these parties have dominated politics in Tamil Nadu for 
the last four decades. Since 1996, one of these parties has been a part 
of the ruling coalition at the Centre. In the 1990s, many other parties 
have emerged. These include Marumalarchchi Dravida Munnetra 
Kazhagam (MDMK), Pattali Makkal Katchi (PMK) and Desiya Murpokku 
Dravidar Kazhagam (DMDK). All these parties have kept alive the issue 
of regional pride in the politics of Tamil Nadu. Initially seen as a threat 
to Indian nationalism, regional politics in Tamil Nadu is a good example 
of the compatibility of regionalism and nationalism.
                                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       153  
2018-19
154                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
the infiltrators from Kashmir valley, but only after the 
Maharaja had signed an ‘Instrument of Accession’ with 
the Government of India.  It was also agreed that once the 
situation normalised, the views of the people of J&K will 
be ascertained about their future. Sheikh Abdullah took 
over as the Prime Minister of the State of J&K (the head 
of the government in the State was then called Prime 
Minister) in March 1948. India agreed to maintain the 
autonomy of Jammu and Kashmir.
External and internal disputes
Since then, the politics of Jammu and Kashmir always 
remained controversial and conflict ridden both for 
external and internal reasons. Externally, Pakistan has 
always claimed that Kashmir valley should be part of 
Pakistan. As we noted above, Pakistan sponsored a tribal 
invasion of the State in 1947, as a consequence of which 
one part of the State came under Pakistani control. India 
claims that this area is under illegal occupation. Pakistan 
describes this area as ‘Azad Kashmir’. Ever since 1947, 
Sheikh 
Mohammad 
Abdullah 
(1905-1982): 
Leader of Jammu 
and Kashmir; 
proponent of 
autonomy and 
secularism for 
Jammu and Kashmir; led the 
popular struggle against princely 
rule; opposed to Pakistan due to 
its non-secular character; leader 
of the National Conference; Prime 
Minister of J&K immediately 
after its accession with India in 
1947; dismissed and jailed by 
Government of India from 1953 to 
1964 and again from 1965 to 1968; 
became Chief Minister of the State 
after an agreement with Indira 
Gandhi in 1974.
Credit: Hindustan Times
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       155  
Kashmir has remained a major issue of 
conflict between India and Pakistan.  
Internally, there is a dispute about 
the status of Kashmir within the Indian 
union. You know that Kashmir was given 
a special status by Article 370 in our 
Constitution. You have studied about the 
special provisions under Articles 370 and 
371 last year in Indian Constitution at 
Work. Article 370 gives greater autonomy 
to Jammu and Kashmir compared to 
other States of India. The State has its 
own Constitution.  All provisions of the 
Indian Constitution are not applicable to 
the State. Laws passed by the Parliament 
apply to J&K only if the State agrees. 
This special status has provoked two 
opposite reactions. There is a section 
of  people outside of J&K that believes 
that the special status of the State 
conferred by Article 370 does not allow 
full integration of the State with India. 
This section feels that Article 370 should 
therefore be revoked and J&K should be 
like any other State in India. 
Another section, mostly Kashmiris, 
believe that the autonomy conferred by 
Article 370 is not enough. A section of 
Kashmiris have expressed at least three 
major grievances. First, the promise that 
Accession would be referred to the people 
of the State after the situation created 
by tribal invasion was normalised, has 
not been fulfilled.  This has generated 
the demand for a ‘Plebiscite’. Secondly, 
there is a feeling that the special federal 
status guaranteed by Article 370, has 
been eroded in practice. This has led to 
the demand for restoration of autonomy 
or ‘Greater State Autonomy’. Thirdly, it 
is felt that democracy which is practiced 
in the rest of India has not been similarly 
institutionalised in the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir.  
Let’s watch a Film
ROJA
Tamil film depicting the travails 
of Roja, a newly wed and doting 
wife when her husband, Rishi,  is 
abducted by militants. Rishi is a  
cryptologist who is assigned duty 
in Kashmir to decode the enemy 
messages. As love blossoms 
between the husband and the 
wife, the husband is kidnapped. 
The kidnappers demand that 
their jailed leader, be set free in 
exchange of Rishi.
Roja’s world is shattered and she 
is seen knocking at the doors of 
officials and politicians. Since the 
film has the background of Indo-
Pakistan dispute, it made instant 
appeal. The film was dubbed 
in Hindi and many other Indian 
languages. 
Year: 1992
Director: Maniratnam
Screenplay: Maniratnam
Cast (Hindi version): Madhu, 
Arvind Swamy, Pankaj Kapoor, 
Janagaraj
2018-19
156                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
Politics since 1948
After taking over as the Prime Minister, Sheikh Abdullah initiated 
major land reforms and other policies which benefited ordinary 
people. But there was a growing difference between him and the 
central government about his position on Kashmir’s status. He was 
dismissed in 1953 and kept in detention for a number of years. 
The leadership that succeeded him did not enjoy as much popular 
support and was able to rule the State mainly due to the support of 
the Centre. There were serious allegations of malpractices and rigging 
in various elections.
During most of the period between 1953 and 1974, the Congress 
party exercised a lot of influence on the politics of the State. A 
truncated National Conference (minus Sheikh Abdullah) remained in 
power with the active support of Congress for some time but later it 
merged with the Congress. Thus the Congress gained direct control 
over the government in the State. In the meanwhile, there were several 
attempts to reach an agreement between Sheikh Abdullah and the 
Government of India. Finally, in 1974 Indira Gandhi reached an 
agreement with Sheikh Abdullah and he became the Chief Minister of 
the State. He revived the National Conference which was elected with 
So, Nehru 
kept his personal 
friend in jail for such 
a long period! How did 
they feel about it?
Credit: The Times of India
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       157  
a majority in the assembly elections held in 1977. 
Sheikh Abdullah died in 1982 and the leadership 
of the National Conference went to his son, 
Farooq Abdullah, who became the Chief Minister. 
But he was soon dismissed by the Governor and 
a breakaway faction of the National Conference 
came to power for a brief period.
The dismissal of Farooq Abdullah’s government 
due to the intervention of the Centre generated a 
feeling of resentment in Kashmir. The confidence 
that Kashmiris had developed in the democratic 
processes after the accord between Indira Gandhi 
and Sheikh Abdullah, received a set-back. The 
feeling that the Centre was intervening in politics 
of the State was further strengthened when the 
National Conference in 1986 agreed to have an 
electoral alliance with the Congress, the ruling 
party in the Centre. 
Insurgency and after
It was in this environment that the 1987 Assembly election took 
place. The official results showed a massive victory for the National 
Conference – Congress alliance and Farooq Abdullah returned as Chief 
Minister.  But it was widely believed that the results did not reflect 
popular choice, and that the entire election process was rigged. A 
popular resentment had already been brewing in the State against the 
inefficient administration since early 1980s. This was now augmented 
by the commonly prevailing feeling that democratic processes were 
being undermined at the behest of the Centre. This generated a political 
crisis in Kashmir which became severe with the rise of insurgency. 
By 1989, the State had come in the grip of a militant movement 
mobilised around the cause of a separate Kashmiri nation. The 
insurgents got moral, material and military support from Pakistan. For 
a number of years the State was under President’s rule and effectively 
under the control of the armed forces. Throughout the period from 
1990, Jammu and Kashmir experienced violence at the hands of the 
insurgents and through army action. Assembly elections in the State 
were held only in 1996 in which the National Conference led by Farooq 
Abdullah came to power with a demand for regional autonomy for 
Jammu and Kashmir.  J&K experienced a very fair election in 2002. 
The National Conference failed to win a majority and was replaced by 
People’s Democratic Party (PDP) and Congress coalition government. 
Separatism and beyond
Separatist politics which surfaced in Kashmir from 1989 has taken 
different forms and is made up of various strands.  There is one strand 
                   T e Kashmiris 
were convinced now at 
the se ond de hronement 
o  their elec ed leader [in 
1984] that India would 
never permit them to rule 
themselve .
B. K. Nehru 
Governor of J&K before 
the dismissal of Farooq 
Abdullah’s government. 
“
“
Peace in Kashmir
http://govande.sulekha.com
2018-19
158                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
of separatists who want a separate Kashmiri nation, independent 
of India and Pakistan. Then there are groups that want Kashmir to 
merge with Pakistan. Besides these, there is a third strand which 
wants greater autonomy for the people of the State within the 
Indian union. The idea of autonomy attracts the people of Jammu 
and Ladakh regions in a different way. They often complain of 
neglect and backwardness. Therefore, the demand for intra-State 
autonomy is as strong as the demand for the State autonomy. 
The initial period of popular support to militancy has now given 
way to the urge for peace. The Centre has started negotiations with 
various separatist groups. Instead of demanding a separate nation, 
most of the separatists in dialogue are trying to re-negotiate a 
relationship of the State with India.
Jammu and Kashmir is one of the living examples of plural 
society and politics. Not only are there diversities of all kind 
(religious, cultural, linguistic, ethnic, tribal) but there are also 
divergent political aspirations. However, despite all these diversities 
and divergence on the one hand, and the continued situation of 
conflict on the other, the plural and secular culture of the State 
has remained largely intact.   
Punjab
The decade of 1980s also witnessed major developments in the 
State of Punjab. The social composition of the State changed first 
with Partition and later on after the carving out of Haryana and 
Himachal Pradesh.  While the rest of the country was reorganised 
on linguistic lines in 1950s, Punjab had to wait till 1966 for the 
creation of a Punjabi speaking State. The Akali Dal, which was 
formed in 1920 as the political wing of the Sikhs, had led the 
movement for the formation of a ‘Punjabi suba’. The Sikhs were 
now a majority in the truncated State of Punjab.
Political context
After the reorganisation, the Akalis came to power in 1967 
and then in 1977. On both the occasions it was a coalition 
government. The Akalis discovered that despite the redrawing 
of the boundaries, their political position remained precarious. 
Firstly, their government was dismissed by the Centre mid-way 
through its term. Secondly, they did not enjoy strong support 
among the Hindus. Thirdly, the Sikh community, like all other 
religious communities, was internally differentiated on caste and 
class lines. The Congress got more support among the Dalits, 
whether Hindu or Sikh, than the Akalis. 
It was in this context that during the 1970s a section of Akalis 
began to demand political autonomy for the region. This was 
Master Tara Singh 
(1885-1967): 
Prominent Sikh 
religious and political 
leader;   one of the 
early leaders of the 
Shiromani Gurudwara 
Prabandhak 
Committee (SGPC); 
leader of the Akali 
movement; supporter 
of the freedom 
movement but 
opposed to Congress’ 
policy of negotiating 
only with the Muslims; 
after Independence, 
he was the senior 
most advocate of 
formation of separate 
Punjab State.
This 
is all about 
governments, officials, 
leaders, terrorists… but 
what about the people in 
Kashmir? In a democracy 
we must go by what they 
want, shouldn’t we?
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       159  
reflected in a resolution passed at their conference at Anandpur 
Sahib in 1973. The Anandpur Sahib Resolution asserted regional 
autonomy and wanted to redefine centre-state relationship in the 
country. The resolution also spoke of the aspirations of the Sikh 
qaum (community or nation) and declared its goal as attaining the 
bolbala (dominance or hegemony) of the Sikhs. The Resolution was 
a plea for strengthening federalism, but it could also be interpreted 
as a plea for a separate Sikh nation.
The Resolution had a limited appeal among the Sikh masses. A 
few years later, after the Akali government had been dismissed in 
1980, the Akali Dal launched a movement on the question of the 
distribution of water between Punjab and its neighbouring States. 
A section of the religious leaders raised the question of autonomous 
Sikh identity. The more extreme elements started advocating 
secession from India and the creation of ‘Khalistan’. 
Cycle of violence
Soon, the leadership of the movement passed from the moderate 
Akalis to the extremist elements and took the form of armed 
insurgency. These militants made their headquarters inside the 
Sikh holy shrine, the Golden Temple in Amritsar, and turned it into 
an armed fortress. In June 1984, the Government of India carried 
out ‘Operation Blue Star’, code name for army action in the Golden 
Temple. In this operation, the Government could successfully flush 
out the militants, but it also damaged the historic temple and 
deeply hurt the sentiments of the Sikhs. A large proportion of Sikhs 
in India and abroad saw the military operation as an attack on 
their faith and this gave further impetus to militant and extremist 
groups.  
Still more tragic turn of events complicated the Punjab problem 
further. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi was assassinated on 
31 October 1984  outside her residence by her 
bodyguards. 
Both 
the assassins were 
Sikhs and wanted 
to take revenge for 
Operation Bluestar. 
While 
the 
entire 
country was shocked 
by this development, 
in Delhi and in many 
parts 
of 
northern 
India violence broke 
out 
against 
the 
Sikh 
community. 
The violence against 
the Sikhs continued 
Sant Harchand 
Singh Longowal 
(1932-1985):   
Sikh political 
and religious 
leader; began his 
political career 
in mid-sixties as 
an Akali leader; 
became president 
of Akali Dal in 
1980; reached an 
agreement with 
Prime Minister 
Rajiv Gandhi on 
key demands 
of Akalis; 
assassinated by 
unidentified Sikh 
youth.
2018-19
160                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
for almost a week. More than two 
thousand Sikhs were killed in the 
national capital, the area worst 
affected by this violence. Hundreds 
of Sikhs were killed in other parts of 
the country, especially in places like 
Kanpur, Bokaro and Chas. Many Sikh 
families lost their male members and 
thus suffered great emotional and 
heavy financial loss. What hurt the 
Sikhs most was that the government 
took a long time in restoring normalcy 
and that the perpetrators of this 
violence were not effectively punished. 
Twenty years later, speaking in the 
Parliament in 2005, Prime Minister 
Manmohan Singh expressed regret over 
these killings and apologised to the 
nation for the anti-Sikh violence. 
                 T ere is also 
evidence to show that on 
31-10-84 either mee ings 
were held or persons w o 
could organise at acks 
were contacted and 
were given instructions 
to kill Sikhs and loo  
their house  and shops. 
T e at acks were made 
in a s stematic manner 
and without much fear 
o  the police, almost 
sug e ting that the  were 
a  ured that the  would 
no  be harmed w ile 
commit ing those acts or 
even af er.
Justice Nanavati 
Commission of Inquiry, 
Report, Vol. I, 2005
“
“
Women looking at a wall painting 
depicting Indira Gandhi’s assassination. 
Credit : Raghu Rai
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       161  
Road to peace
After coming to power following the election in 1984, the new Prime 
Minister Rajiv Gandhi initiated a dialogue with moderate Akali 
leaders. In July 1985, he reached an agreement with Harchand 
Singh Longowal, then the President of the Akali Dal. This agreement, 
known as the Rajiv Gandhi - Longowal Accord or the Punjab Accord, 
was a step towards bringing normalcy to Punjab. It was agreed that 
Chandigarh would be transferred to Punjab, a separate commission 
would be appointed to resolve the border dispute between Punjab 
and Haryana, and a tribunal would be set up to decide the sharing 
of Ravi-Beas river water among Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan. The 
agreement also provided for compensation to and better treatment of 
those affected by the militancy in Punjab and the withdrawal of the 
application of Armed Forces Special Powers Act in Punjab. 
However, peace did not come easily or immediately. The cycle 
of violence continued nearly for a decade. Militancy and counter 
insurgency violence led to excesses by the police and violations of 
human rights. Politically, it led to fragmentation of the Akali Dal. The 
central government had to impose President’s rule in the State and 
the normal electoral and political process was suspended. It was not 
easy to restore the political process in the atmosphere of suspicion 
and violence. When elections were held in Punjab in 1992, only 24 
per cent of the electors tuned out to vote. 
Militancy was eventually eradicated by the security forces.  But 
the losses incurred by the people of Punjab – Sikhs and Hindus alike 
– were enormous.  Peace returned to Punjab by the middle of 1990s. 
The alliance of Akali Dal (Badal) and the BJP scored a major victory 
in1997, in the first normal elections in the State in the post-militancy 
era. The State is once again preoccupied with questions of economic 
development and social change.  Though religious identities continue 
to be important for the people, politics has gradually moved back 
along secular lines. 
           I have 
no he itation in 
apologising no  only to 
the Sikh community 
but the w ole Indian 
nation be ause w at 
took place in 1984 is 
the negation o  the 
concept o  nationhood 
and w at is enshrined 
in our Constitution.  
So, I am no  standing 
on any false pre tige.  
On behalf o  our 
Government, on behalf 
o  the entire people o  
this country, I bow my 
head in shame that 
such thing took place.  
But, Sir, there are ebbs, 
there are tide  in the 
aﬀ airs o  nations.  T e 
past is with us.  We 
canno  rewrite the 
past.  But as human 
beings, we have the 
willpower and we have 
the ability to write 
be  er future for all 
o  us.
Prime Minister 
Dr. Manmohan Singh
intervening in Rajya 
Sabha debate on 
11 August 2005
“
“
The Times of 
India brought 
out a special 
mid-day 
edition on the 
day Indira 
Gandhi was 
assassinated.
Credit : Times of India
2018-19
162                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
T e North-East
In the North-East, regional aspirations reached a turning point in 
1980s. This region now consists of seven States, also referred to as 
the ‘seven sisters’. The region has only 4 per cent of the country’s 
population but about twice as much share of its area. A small corridor 
of about 22 kilometers connects the region to the rest of the country. 
Otherwise the region shares boundaries with China, Myanmar and 
Bangladesh and serves as India’s gateway to South East Asia. 
The region has witnessed a lot of change since 1947. Tripura, 
Manipur and Khasi Hills of Meghalaya were erstwhile Princely States 
which merged with India after Independence. The entire region of 
North-East has undergone considerable political reorganisation. 
Nagaland State was created in 1963; Manipur, Tripura and Meghalaya 
in 1972 while Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh became separate 
States only in 1987.  The Partition of India in 1947 had reduced the 
North-East to a land locked region and affected its economy. Cut off 
from the rest of India, the region suffered neglect in developmental 
terms. Its politics too remained insulated. At the same time, most 
States in this region underwent major demographic changes due to 
influx of migrants from neighbouring States and countries.
The isolation of the region, its complex social character and 
its backwardness compared to other parts of the country have all 
resulted in the complicated set of demands from different states of the 
North-East. The vast international 
border and weak communication 
between the North-East and the 
rest of India have further added 
to the delicate nature of politics 
there.  Three issues dominate the 
politics of North-East: demands 
for autonomy, movements for 
secession, and  opposition to 
‘outsiders’. Major initiatives on 
the first issue in the 1970s set 
the stage for some dramatic 
developments on the second and 
the third in the 1980s. 
Demands for autonomy
At independence the entire region 
except 
Manipur 
and 
Tripura 
comprised the State of Assam. 
Demands for political autonomy 
arose when the non-Assamese 
felt that the Assam government 
was imposing Assamese language 
Note: This illustration 
is not a map drawn to 
scale and should not be 
taken to be an authentic 
depiction of India’s 
external boundaries. 
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       163  
on them. There were opposition and protest riots throughout the 
State. Leaders of the major tribal communities wanted to separate 
from Assam. They formed the Eastern India Tribal Union which 
later transformed into a more comprehensive All Party Hill Leaders 
Conference in 1960. They demanded a tribal State to be carved out of 
Assam. Finally instead of one tribal State, several States got carved 
out of Assam. At different points of time the Central Government had 
to create Meghalaya, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh out of Assam. 
Tripura and Manipur were upgraded into States too.  
The reorganisation of the North-East was completed by 1972. But 
this was not the end of autonomy demands in this region. In Assam, 
for example, communities like the Bodos, Karbis and Dimasas wanted 
separate States. They worked for this demand by mobilising public 
opinion and popular movement as well as through insurgency. Often 
the same area was claimed by more than one community. It was not 
possible to go on making smaller and yet smaller States. Therefore, 
some other provisions of our federal set up were used to satisfy their 
autonomy demands while remaining in Assam. Karbis and Dimasas 
have been granted autonomy under District Councils while Bodos 
were recently granted Autonomous Council. 
Secessionist movements
Demands for autonomy were easier to respond to, for these involved 
using the various provisions in the Constitution for accommodation of 
diversities. It was much more difficult when some groups demanded 
a separate country, not in momentary anger but consistently as a 
principled position. The country’s leadership faced this problem for a 
very long time in at least two States in the North-East. A comparison 
of these two cases offers us a lesson in democratic politics.
After Independence, the Mizo Hills area was made an autonomous 
district within Assam. Some Mizos believed that they were never a 
part of British India and therefore did not belong to the Indian union. 
But the movement for secession gained popular support after the 
Assam government failed to respond adequately to the great famine 
of 1959 in Mizo hills. The Mizos’ anger led to the formation of the Mizo 
National Front (MNF) under the leadership of Laldenga. 
In 1966 the MNF started an armed campaign for independence. 
Thus, started a two decade long battle between Mizo insurgents and 
the Indian army. The MNF fought a guerilla war, got support from 
Pakistani government and secured shelter in the then East Pakistan. 
The Indian security forces countered it with a series of repressive 
measures of which the common people were the victims. At one point 
even Air Force was used. These measures caused more anger and 
alienation among the people. 
At the end of two decades of insurgency everyone was a loser. 
This is where maturity of the political leadership at both ends made 
Laldenga 
(1937-1990): 
Founder and 
leader of the 
Mizo National 
Front; turned into 
a rebel after the 
experience of the 
famine in 1959; 
led an armed 
struggle against 
India for two 
decades; reached 
a settlement 
and signed an 
agreement with 
Prime Minister 
Rajiv Gandhi in 
1986; became the 
Chief Minister of 
the newly created 
State of Mizoram.
My friend 
Chon said that 
people in Delhi know 
more about the map of 
Europe than about the 
North-East in our country. 
I think she is right at least 
about my schoolmates.
2018-19
164                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
a difference. Laldenga came back from exile in Pakistan and started 
negotiations with the Indian government. Rajiv Gandhi steered these 
negotiations to a positive conclusion.  In 1986 a peace agreement 
was signed between Rajiv Gandhi and Laldenga. As per this accord 
Mizoram was granted full-fledged statehood  with special powers and 
the MNF agreed to give up secessionist 
struggle. Laldenga took over as the 
Chief Minister. This accord proved 
a turning point in the history of 
Mizoram. Today, Mizoram is one 
of the most peaceful places in the 
region and has taken big strides in 
literacy and development.
The story of Nagaland is similar 
to Mizoram, except that it started 
much earlier and has not yet had 
such a happy ending. Led by Angami 
Zaphu Phizo, a section of the Nagas 
declared independence from India 
way back in 1951. Phizo turned 
down many offers of negotiated 
settlement. The Naga National 
Council launched an armed 
struggle 
for 
sovereignty 
of 
Nagas. After a period of violent 
insurgency a section of the 
Nagas signed an agreement 
with the Government of India 
Credit : Times of India
strug
Chief
a tu
Mizo
of t
reg
lite
to
m
s
Z
Declaration of cease fire by MNF
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       165  
but this was not acceptable to other rebels. The problem in Nagaland 
still awaits a final resolution.
Movements against outsiders
The large scale migration into the North-East gave rise to a special 
kind of problem that pitted the ‘local’ communities against people 
who were seen as ‘outsiders’ or migrants.  These latecomers, either 
from India or abroad are seen as encroachers on scarce resources 
like land and potential competitors to employment opportunities and 
political power. This issue has taken political and sometimes violent 
form in many States of the North-East. 
The Assam Movement from 1979 to 1985 is the best example 
of such movements against ‘outsiders’.  The Assamese suspected 
that there were huge numbers of illegal Bengali Muslim settlers 
from Bangladesh. They felt that unless these foreign nationals are 
detected and deported they would reduce the indigenous Assamese 
into a minority. There were other economic issues too. There was 
widespread poverty and unemployment in Assam despite the 
existence of natural resources like oil, tea and coal. It was felt that 
these were drained out of the State without any commensurate 
benefit to the people.  
In 1979 the All Assam Students’ Union (AASU), a students’ 
group not affiliated to any party, led an anti-foreigner movement. 
The movement was against illegal migrations, against domination 
of Bengalis and other outsiders, and against faulty voters’ register 
that included the names of lakhs of immigrants. The movement 
demanded that all outsiders who had entered the State after 1951 
should be sent back. The agitation followed many novel methods and 
mobilised all sections of Assamese people, drawing support across 
the State. It also involved many tragic and violent incidents leading 
to loss of property and human lives. The movement also tried to 
blockade the movement of trains and the supply of oil from Assam 
to refineries in Bihar. 
Eventually after six years of turmoil, the Rajiv Gandhi-led 
government entered into negotiations with the AASU leaders, 
leading to the signing of an accord in 1985.  According to this 
agreement those foreigners who migrated into Assam during and 
after Bangladesh war and since, were to be identified and deported. 
With the successful completion of the movement, the AASU and the 
Asom Gana Sangram Parishad organised themselves as a regional 
political party called Asom Gana Parishad (AGP). It came to power 
in 1985 with the promise of resolving the foreign national problem 
as well as to build a ‘Golden Assam’.
Assam accord brought peace and changed the face of politics in 
Assam, but it did not solve the problem of immigration. The issue of 
the ‘outsiders’ continues to be a live issue in the politics of Assam 
l
r 
t 
t 
n
r
t
Angami Zapu 
Phizo 
(1904-1990): 
Leader of the 
movement for 
independent 
Nagaland; 
president of Naga 
National Council; 
began an armed 
struggle against the 
Indian state; went 
‘underground’, 
stayed in Pakistan 
and spent the last 
three decades of 
his life in exile in 
UK.
I’ve never 
understood this 
insider-outsider 
business. It’s like the 
train compartment. 
Someone who got 
in before others 
treats others as 
outsiders.
2018-19
166                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
and many other places in the 
North-East. This problem 
is particularly acute, for 
example, in Tripura as the 
original 
inhabitants 
have 
been reduced to being a 
minority in their own land. 
The same feeling informs 
the hostility of the local 
population 
to 
Chakma 
refugees in Mizoram and 
Arunachal Pradesh.
To end the news, here is a look at the 
activities of terrorists in the four regions... 
Punjab, Darjeeling, Delhi, Mizoram
Credit: HT book of Cartoon  Rambabu Mathur
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       167  
Accommodation and National Integration
These  cases  have shown us that even after six decades of Independence, 
some of the issues of national integration are not fully resolved. We 
have seen that regional aspirations ranging from demands of statehood 
and economic development to autonomy and separation keep coming 
up. The period since 1980 accentuated these tensions and tested 
the capacity of democratic politics to accommodate the demands of 
diverse sections of the society.  What lessons can we draw from these 
examples? 
First and the most elementary lesson is that regional aspirations 
are very much a part of democratic politics. Expression of regional 
issues is not an aberration or an abnormal phenomenon. Even 
in smaller countries like the United Kingdom there are regional 
aspirations in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Spain faces 
secessionist movement from the Basques and so does Sri Lanka from 
the Tamils. A large and diverse democracy like India must deal with 
regional aspirations on a regular basis. Nation building is an ongoing 
process.
Sikkim’s merger 
At the time of Independence, Sikkim was a ‘protectorate’ of 
India. It meant that while it was not a part of India, it was also 
not a fully sovereign country. Sikkim’s defence and foreign 
relations were looked after by India, while the power of internal 
administration was with the Chogyal, Sikkim’s monarch. This 
arrangement ran into difficulty as the Chogyal was unable to deal 
with the democratic aspirations of the people. An overwhelming 
majority of Sikkim’s population was Nepali. But the Chogyal was 
seen as perpetuating the rule of a small elite from the minority 
Lepcha-Bhutia community. The anti-Chogyal leaders of both the 
communities sought and got support from the Government of 
India. 
The first democratic elections to Sikkim assembly in 1974 were 
swept by Sikkim Congress which stood for greater integration 
with India. The assembly first sought the status of ‘associate 
state’ and then in April 1975 passed a resolution asking for 
full integration with India. This was followed by a hurriedly 
organised referendum that put a stamp of popular approval on 
the assembly’s request. The Indian Parliament accepted this 
request immediately and Sikkim became the 22nd State of 
the Indian union. Chogyal did not accept this merger and his 
supporters accused the Government of India of foul play and 
use of force. Yet the merger enjoyed popular support and did not 
become a divisive issue in Sikkim’s politics.
Kazi Lhendup Dorji 
Khangsarpa (1904): 
Leader of democracy 
movement in Sikkim; 
founder of Sikkim Praja 
Mandal and later leader of 
the Sikkim State Congress; 
in 1962 founded the Sikkim 
National Congress; after an 
electoral victory, he led the 
movement for integration 
of Sikkim with India; after 
the integration, Sikkim 
Congress merged with the 
Indian National Congress.
2018-19
168                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
The second lesson is that the best way to respond to regional 
aspirations is through democratic negotiations rather than 
through suppression. Look at the situation in the eighties – 
militancy had erupted in Punjab; problems were persisting in the 
North-East; students in Assam were agitating; Kashmir valley 
was on the boil. Instead of treating these as simple law and order 
problems, the Government of India reached negotiated settlement 
with regional movements. This produced a reconciliation which 
reduced the tensions existing in many regions. The example of 
Mizoram shows how political settlement can resolve the problem 
of separatism effectively. 
The third lesson is about the significance of power sharing. It 
is not sufficient to have a formal democratic structure. Besides 
that, groups and parties from the region need to be given share 
in power at the State level. Similarly, it is not sufficient to say 
that the states or the regions have autonomy in their matters. 
The regions together form the nation. So, the regions must have 
a share in deciding the destiny of the nation. If regions are not 
given a share in the national level decision making, the feeling of 
injustice and alienation can spread.
The fourth lesson is that regional imbalance in economic 
development contributes to the feeling of regional discrimination. 
Regional imbalance is a fact of India’s development experience. 
Naturally, the backward states or backward regions in some 
states feel that their backwardness should be addressed on 
priority basis and that the policies of the Indian government have 
caused this imbalance. If some states remain poor and others 
develop rapidly, it leads to regional imbalances and inter-regional 
migrations.
Finally, these cases make us appreciate the farsightedness 
of the makers of our Constitution in dealing with questions 
of diversity. The federal system adopted by India is a flexible 
arrangement. While most of the states have equal powers, there 
are special provisions for some states like J&K and the states in 
the North-East. The Sixth Schedule of the Constitution allows 
different tribes complete autonomy of preserving their practices 
and customary laws.  These provisions proved crucial in resolving 
some very complex political problems in the North-East.
What distinguishes India from many other countries that face 
similar challenges is that the constitutional framework in India 
is much more flexible and accommodative. Therefore, regional 
aspirations are not encouraged to espouse separatism. Thus, 
politics in India has succeeded in accepting regionalism as part 
and parcel of democratic politics.
Rajiv Gandhi 
(1944-1991): Prime 
Minister of India 
between 1984 and 
1989; son of Indira 
Gandhi; joined active 
politics after 1980; 
reached agreements 
with militants in 
Punjab, Mizoram and 
the students’ union in 
Assam; pressed for a 
more open economy 
and computer 
technology; sent 
Indian Army 
contingent on 
the request 
of Sri Lankan 
government, to sort 
out the Sinhala-
Tamil conflict;  
assassinated by 
suspected LTTE 
suicide bomber.  
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       169  
Goa’s liberation
Although the British empire in India came to an end in 1947, Portugal refused to withdraw from 
the territories of Goa, Diu and Daman which were under its colonial rule since the sixteenth 
century. During their long rule, the Portuguese suppressed the people of Goa, denied them 
civil rights, and carried out forced religious conversions. After India’s Independence, the Indian 
government tried very patiently to persuade the Portuguese government to withdraw. There 
was also a strong popular movement within Goa for freedom. They were strengthened by 
socialist satyagrahis from Maharashtra.  Finally, in December 1961, the Government of India 
sent the army which liberated these territories after barely two days of action. Goa, Diu and 
Daman became Union Territory. 
Another complication arose soon. Led by the Maharashtrawadi Gomanatak Party  (MGP) 
one section desired that Goa, as a Marathi speaking area should merge with Maharashtra. 
However, many Goans were keen to retain a separate Goan identity and culture, particularly 
the Konkani language. They were led by the United Goan Party (UGP). In January 1967, 
the Central Government held a special ‘opinion poll’ in Goa asking people to decide if they 
wanted to be part of Maharashtra or remain separate. A referendum-like procedure was used 
to ascertain people’s wishes on this issue. The majority voted in favour of remaining outside 
of Maharashtra. Thus, Goa continued as a Union Territory.  Finally, in 1987, Goa became a 
State of the Indian Union. 
                    
 
 
 
 
  
                                                                    169  
Credit: R.K. Laxman in The Times of India, 
21 April 1954
2018-19
170                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
EXERCISES
  1.  Match the following. 
  
 
 
A                                                           
B     
  
Nature of regional aspirations   
 
States
  
(a)  
Socio-religious identity  
 
 
i. 
Nagaland /Mizoram   
  
 
 
leading to statehood                                
  
(b)  
Linguistic identity and   
 
 
ii. Jharkhand /Chattisgarh
  
 
 
tensions with Centre                   
  
(c)  
Regional imbalance leading  
 
iii.  Punjab  
  
 
 
to demand for Statehood    
  
(d)   
Secessionist demands on   
 
iv.  Tamil Nadu
  
 
 
account of tribal identity        
                                                     
                                    
  2.  Regional aspirations of the people of North-East get expressed 
in different ways. These include movements against outsiders, 
movement for greater autonomy and movement for separate national 
existence. On the map of the North-East, using different shades for 
these three, show the States where these expressions are prominently 
found.
  3.  What were the main provisions of the Punjab accord? In what way 
can they be the basis for further tensions between the Punjab and its 
neighbouring States? 
  4.  Why did the Anandpur Sahib Resolution become controversial?   
  5.  Explain the internal divisions of the State of Jammu and Kashmir and 
describe how these lead to multiple regional aspirations in that State.
  6.  What are the various positions on the issue of regional autonomy for 
Kashmir? Which of these do you think are justifiable? Give reasons for 
your answer.
 
  7.  The Assam movement was a combination of cultural pride and economic 
backwardness. Explain.
  8.  All regional movements need not lead to separatist demands. Explain 
by giving examples from this chapter. 
  9.  Regional demands from different parts of India exemplify the principle 
of unity with diversity. Do you agree? Give reasons.
10.  Read the passage and answer the questions below:
  
One of Hazarika’s songs.. … dwells on the unity theme; the seven 
states of north-eastern India become seven sisters born of the same 
mother. …. ‘Meghalaya went own way…., Arunachal too separated 
170                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       171  
and Mizoram appeared in Assam’s gateway as a groom to marry 
another daughter.’ ….. …. .. The song ends with a determination to 
keep the unity of the Assamese with other smaller nationalities that 
are left in the present-day Assam – ‘the Karbis and the Mising brothers 
and sisters are our dear ones.’ — SANJIB BARUAH
  
(a) 
Which unity is the poet talking about?
  
(b) 
Why were some States of North-East created separately out of  
 
 
the  erstwhile State of Assam?
  
(c) 
Do you think that the same theme of unity could apply to all the 
 
 
regions of India? Why?
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       171  
2018-19
In this chapter…
In this last chapter we take a synoptic view of the last two decades of 
politics in India. These developments are complex, for various kinds of 
factors came together to produce unanticipated outcomes in this period. 
The new era in politics was impossible to foresee; it is still very difficult to 
understand. These developments are also controversial, for these involve 
deep conflicts and we are still too close to the events. Yet we can ask 
some questions central to the political change in this period.
• 
What are the implications of the rise of coalition politics for our 
democracy?
• 
What is Mandalisation all about? In which ways will it change the 
nature of political representation?
• 
What is the legacy of the Ramjanambhoomi movement and the 
Ayodhya demolition for the nature of political mobilisation?
• 
What does the rise of a new policy consensus do to the nature of 
political choices?
The chapter does not answer these questions. It simply gives you the 
necessary information and some tools so that you can ask and answer 
these questions when you are through with this book. We cannot avoid 
asking these questions just because they are politically sensitive, for the 
whole point of studying the history of politics in India since Independence 
is to make sense of our present.
Ups and downs of 
various political parties 
in the 1990s appeared 
to many, like this 
cartoon drawn in 1990, 
as a roller coaster ride. 
Riding the roller coaster 
are Rajiv Gandhi, V. 
P. Singh, L. K. Advani, 
Chandrashekhar, Jyoti 
Basu, N. T. Rama Rao, 
Devi Lal, P. K. Mahanta 
and K. Karunanidhi. 
2018-19
9
chapter
recent 
developments in 
indian politics
Conte   o  the 1990s
You have read in the last chapter that Rajiv Gandhi became the Prime 
Minister after the assassination of Indira Gandhi. He led the Congress 
to a massive victory in the Lok Sabha elections held immediately 
thereafter in 1984. As the decade of the eighties came to a close, the 
country witnessed five developments that were to make a long-lasting 
impact on our politics. 
F
irst the most crucial development of this period was the defeat 
of the Congress party in the elections held in 1989. The party 
that had won as many as 415 seats in the Lok Sabha in 1984 
was reduced to only 197 in this election. The Congress improved 
its performance and came back to power soon after the mid-term 
elections held in 1991. But the elections of 1989 marked the end of 
what political scientists have called the ‘Congress system’. To be sure, 
the Congress remained an important party and ruled the country 
more than any other party even in this period since 1989. But it lost 
the kind of centrality it earlier enjoyed in the party system.
S
econd development was the rise of the ‘Mandal issue’ in national 
politics. This followed the decision by the new National Front 
government in 1990, to implement the recommendation of 
the Mandal Commission that jobs in central government should be 
reserved for the Other Backward Classes. This led to violent ‘anti-
Mandal’ protests in different parts of the country. This dispute between 
the supporters and opponents of OBC reservations was known as the 
‘Mandal issue’ and was to play an important role in shaping politics 
since 1989.
I wish to find 
out if the Congress 
can still bounce back 
to its old glory. 
Congress leader Sitaram Kesri withdrew the crutches of support from Deve 
Gowda’s United Front Government. 
2018-19
174                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
T
hird, the economic policy followed by the various governments 
took a radically different turn. This is known as the initiation 
of the structural adjustment programme or the new economic 
reforms.  Started by Rajiv Gandhi, these changes first became very 
visible in 1991 and radically changed the direction that the Indian 
economy had pursued since Independence. These policies have been 
widely criticised by various movements and organisations. But the 
various governments that came to power in this period have continued 
to follow these.  
I wish to be sure 
if  this phenomenon 
would have a long-term 
effect. 
I am not clear 
if this will make a 
difference to politics, 
especially if everyone has 
the same policy.
Manmohan Singh, the then Finance Minister, with Prime Minister Narsimha Rao, in 
the initial phase of the ‘New Economic Policy’.
A reaction to Mandalisation.
Credit: R. K. Laxman in the Times of India
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            175  
F
ourth, a number of events culminated in the demolition of 
the disputed structure at Ayodhya (known as Babri Masjid) in 
December 1992. This event symbolised and triggered various 
changes in the politics of the country and intensified debates about 
the nature of Indian nationalism and secularism. These developments 
are associated with the rise of the BJP and the politics of ‘Hindutva’.   
F
inally, the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi in May 1991 led to a 
change in leadership of the Congress party. He was assassinated 
by a Sri Lankan Tamil linked to the LTTE  when he was on 
an election campaign tour in Tamil Nadu. In the elections of 1991, 
Congress emerged as the single largest party. Following Rajiv Gandhi’s 
death, the party chose Narsimha Rao as the Prime Minister.   
I wonder how 
this will affect 
political parties!
A reaction to rising communalism.
Leadership in Congress made many headlines.
1 May 1996
25 October 1995
20 August 2001
25 October 2004
2018-19
176                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
Era o  Coalitions
Elections in 1989 led to the defeat of the Congress party but did not 
result in a majority for any other party. Though the Congress was the 
largest party in the Lok Sabha, it did not have a clear majority and 
therefore, it decided to sit in the opposition. The National Front (which 
itself was an alliance of Janata Dal and some other regional parties) 
received support from two diametrically opposite political groups: the 
BJP and the Left Front. On this basis, the National Front formed a 
coalition government, but the BJP and the Left Front did not join in 
this government. 
Decline of Congress
The defeat of the Congress party marked the end of Congress 
dominance over the Indian party system. Do you remember the 
discussion in Chapter Five about the restoration of the Congress 
system? Way back in the late sixties, the dominance of the Congress 
party was challenged; but the Congress under the leadership of Indira 
Gandhi, managed to re-establish its predominant position in politics. 
The nineties saw yet another challenge to the predominant position of 
the Congress. It did not, however, mean the emergence of any other 
single party to fill in its place.  
The National 
Front 
Government 
lead by V. P. 
Singh was 
supported 
by the Left 
(represented 
here by Jyoti 
Basu) as well 
as the BJP 
(represented by 
L. K. Advani)
Credit: Sudhir Tailang /HT Book of Cartoons
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            177  
Thus, began an era of multi-party system. To be sure, a large 
number of political parties always contested elections in our country. 
Our Parliament always had representatives from several political 
parties. What happened after 1989 was the emergence of several 
parties in such a way that one or two parties did not get most of 
the votes or seats. This also meant that no single party secured a 
clear majority of seats in any Lok Sabha election held since 1989 till 
2014. This development initiated an era of coalition governments at 
the Centre, in which regional parties played a crucial role in forming 
ruling alliances. 
 Let’s re-search
Talk to your parents about their memories of the events happening 
since the 1990s. Ask them what they felt were the most significant 
events of the period.  Sit together in groups and draw a comprehensive 
list of the events reported by your parents, see which events get cited 
most, and compare them with what the chapter suggests were the 
most significant. You can also discuss why some events are more 
important for some and not for others.  
Alliance politics
The nineties also saw the emergence of powerful parties and movements 
that represented the Dalit and backward castes (Other Backward 
Classes or OBCs). Many of these parties represented powerful 
regional assertion as well. These parties played an important role in 
the United Front government that came to power in 1996. The United 
Front was similar to the National Front of 1989 for it included Janata 
Dal and several regional parties. This time the BJP did not support 
the government. The United Front government was supported by 
the Congress. This shows how unstable the political equations were. 
In 1989, both the Left and the BJP supported the National Front 
Government because they wanted to keep the Congress out of power. 
In 1996, the Left continued to support the non-Congress government 
but this time the Congress, supported it, as both the Congress and 
the Left wanted to keep the BJP out of power. 
They did not succeed for long, as the BJP continued to 
consolidate its position in the elections of 1991 and 1996. It 
emerged as the largest party in the 1996 election and was invited 
to form the government. But most other parties were opposed to 
its policies and therefore, the BJP government could not secure 
a majority in the Lok Sabha. It finally came to power by leading 
2018-19
178                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
a coalition government from May 1998 to June 1999 and was 
re-elected in October 1999. Atal Behari Vajpayee was the Prime 
Minister during both these NDA governments and his government 
formed in 1999 completed its full term. 
Thus, with the elections of 1989, a long phase of coalition politics 
began in India.  Since then, there have been eleven governments at 
the Centre, all of which have either been coalition governments or 
minority governments supported by other parties, which did not join 
the government. In this new phase, any government could be formed 
only with the participation or support of many regional parties. This 
applied to the National Front in 1989, the United Front in 1996 and 
1997, the NDA in 1997, the BJP-led coalition in 1998, the NDA in 
1999, the UPA in 2004 and 2009.  However, this trend changed in 2014.
Let us connect this development with what we have learnt so far. 
The era of coalition governments may be seen as a long-term trend 
resulting from relatively silent changes that were taking place over 
the last few decades.  
We saw in Chapter Two that in earlier times, it was the Congress 
party itself that was a ‘coalition’ of different interests and different social 
strata and groups.  This gave rise to the term ‘Congress system’. 
A cartoonist’s depiction of the change from one-party dominance to a multi-party 
alliance system.
Credit: Ajit Ninan/India Today
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            179  
CENTRAL GOVERNMENTS SINCE 1989
Note: The blank space is for you to record more information on the major policies, performance and controversies about that government.
For more details about the current
and former Prime Ministers, visit
http://pmindia.gov.in/en
2018-19
180                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
We also saw in Chapter Five that, especially since the late 1960s, 
various sections had been leaving the Congress fold and forming 
separate political parties of their own. We also noted the rise of many 
regional parties in the period after 1977.  While these developments 
weakened the Congress party, they did not enable any single party to 
replace the Congress. 
OK, coalitions 
are the logic of 
democratic politics in 
our kind of society. Does 
that mean that we will 
always have coalitions? Or 
can the national parties 
consolidate their 
positions again?
I am 
not worried 
about whether 
it is a single 
party or coalition 
government. I am 
more worried about 
what they do. Does a 
coalition government 
involve more 
compromises? Can 
we not have bold and 
imaginative policies 
in a coalition?
Political Rise o  Other Backward Cla  e 
One long-term development of this period was the rise of Other 
Backward Classes as a political force. You have already come across 
this term ‘OBC’. This refers to the administrative category ‘Other 
Backward Classes’. These are communities other than SC and ST 
who suffer from educational and social backwardness. These are also 
referred to as ‘backward castes’. We have already noted in Chapter 
Six that the support for the Congress among many sections of the 
‘backward castes’ had declined. This created a space for non-Congress 
parties that drew more support from these communities. You would 
recall that the rise of these parties first found political expression 
at the national level in the form of the Janata Party government in 
1977. Many of the constituents of the Janata Party, like the Bharatiya 
Kranti Dal and the Samyukta Socialist Party, had a powerful rural 
base among some sections of the OBC.
‘Mandal’ implemented
In the 1980s, the Janata Dal brought together a similar combination 
of political groups with strong support among the OBCs. The decision 
of the National Front government to implement the recommendations 
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            181  
of the Mandal Commission further helped in shaping the politics of 
‘Other Backward Classes’. The intense national debate for and against 
reservation in jobs made people from the OBC communities more 
aware of this identity. Thus, it helped those who wanted to mobilise 
these groups in politics. This period saw the emergence of many 
parties that sought better opportunities for OBCs in education and 
employment and also raised the question of the share of power enjoyed 
by the OBCs. These parties claimed that since OBCs constituted a 
large segment of Indian society, it was only democratic that the OBCs 
should get adequate representation in administration and have their 
due share of political power. 
Implementation of Mandal Commission report sparked off agitations and political upheavals.
2018-19
182                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
The Mandal Commission
Reservations for the OBC were in existence in southern States since the 1960s, 
if not earlier. But this policy was not operative in north Indian States. It was 
during the tenure of Janata Party government in 1977-79 that the demand for 
reservations for backward castes in north India and at the national level was 
strongly raised. Karpoori Thakur, the then Chief Minister of Bihar, was a pioneer 
in this direction. His government had introduced a new policy of reservations for 
OBCs in Bihar. Following this, the central government appointed  a Commission 
in 1978 to look into and recommend ways to improve the conditions of the 
backward classes. This was the second time since Independence that the 
government had appointed such a commission. Therefore, this commission 
was officially known as the Second Backward Classes Commission. Popularly, 
the commission is known as the Mandal Commission, after the name of its 
Chairperson, Bindeshwari Prasad Mandal. 
The 
Mandal 
Commission 
was 
set 
up 
to 
investigate the extent of educational and social 
backwardness among various sections of Indian 
society and recommend ways of identifying these 
‘backward classes’.  It was also expected to give 
its recommendations on the ways in which this 
backwardness could be ended.  The Commission 
gave its recommendations in 1980.  By then the 
Janata government had fallen. The Commission 
advised that ‘backward classes’ should be understood 
to mean ‘backward castes’, since many castes, 
other than the Scheduled Castes, were also treated 
as low in the caste hierarchy. The Commission did 
a survey and found that these backward castes had 
a very low presence in both educational institutions 
and in employment in public services. It therefore 
recommended reserving 27 per cent of seats in 
educational institutions and government jobs for 
these groups. The Mandal Commission also made 
many other recommendations, like, land reform, to 
improve the conditions of the OBCs.
In August 1990, the National Front government 
decided to implement one of the recommendations 
of Mandal Commission pertaining to reservations 
for OBCs in jobs in the central government and its 
undertakings. This decision sparked agitations and 
violent protests in many cities of north India. The 
decision was also challenged in the Supreme Court and came to be known 
as the ‘Indira Sawhney case’, after the name of one of the petitioners. In 
November 1992, the Supreme Court gave a ruling upholding the decision of 
the government.  There were some differences among political parties about 
the manner of implementation of this decision. But now the policy of reservation 
for OBCs has support of all the major political parties of the country.
B.P. Mandal 
(1918-1982): M.P. from 
Bihar for 1967-1970 
and 1977-1979; chaired 
the Second Backward 
Classes Commission 
that recommended 
reservations for Other 
Backward Classes; a 
socialist leader from Bihar; 
Chief Minister of Bihar for 
just a month and a half in 
1968; joined the Janata 
Party in 1977.
182                                    
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            183  
Political fallouts
The 1980s also saw the rise of political organisation of the Dalits. 
In 1978 the Backward and Minority Communities Employees 
Federation (BAMCEF) was formed. This organisation was not an 
ordinary trade union of government employees. It took a strong 
position in favour of political power to the ‘bahujan’ – the SC, ST, 
OBC and minorities. It was out of this that the subsequent Dalit 
Shoshit Samaj Sangharsh Samiti and later the Bahujan Samaj 
Party (BSP) emerged under the leadership of Kanshi Ram. The 
BSP began as a small party supported largely by Dalit voters in 
Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. But in 1989 and the 1991 
elections, it achieved a breakthrough in Uttar Pradesh. This was 
the first time in independent India that a political party supported 
mainly by Dalit voters had achieved this kind of political success. 
In fact, the BSP, under Kanshi Ram’s leadership was envisaged 
as an organisation based on pragmatic politics. It derived 
confidence from the fact that the Bahujans (SC, ST, OBC and 
religious minorities)  constituted the majority of the population, 
and were a formidable political force on the strength of their 
numbers.  Since then the BSP has emerged as a major political 
player in the State and has been in government on more than one 
occasion. Its strongest support still comes from Dalit voters, but 
it has expanded its support now to various other social groups. In 
many parts of India, Dalit politics and OBC politics have developed 
independently and often in competition with each other. 
Kanshi Ram 
(1934-2006): 
Proponent 
of Bahujan 
empowerment and 
founder of Bahujan 
Samaj Party (BSP); 
left his central 
government job for 
social and political 
work; founder of 
BAMCEF, DS-4 
and finally the 
BSP in 1984; 
astute political 
strategist, he 
regarded political 
power as master 
key to attaining 
social equality; 
credited with Dalit 
resurgence in north 
Indian States.
Will 
this benefit 
leaders of all the 
backward and Dalit 
communities? Or will the 
gains be monopolised by some 
powerful castes and families 
within these groups?
The real point 
is not the leaders but 
the people! Will this lead 
to better policies and effective 
implementation for the really 
deprived people? Or will it remain 
just a political game?
2018-19
184                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
Communalism, Se ularism, Democracy
The other long-term development during this period was the rise of 
politics based on religious identity, leading to a debate about secularism 
and democracy. We noted in Chapter Six that in the aftermath of the 
Emergency, the Bharatiya Jana Sangh had merged into the Janata 
Party. After the fall of the Janata Party and its break-up, the supporters 
of erstwhile Jana Sangh formed the Bharatiya Janata Party ( BJP) in 
1980. Initially, the BJP adopted a broader political platform than that 
of the Jana Sangh.  It embraced ‘Gandhian Socialism’ as its ideology. 
But it did not get much success in the elections held in 1980 and 1984. 
After 1986, the party began to emphasise the Hindu nationalist element 
in its ideology. The BJP pursued the politics of ‘Hindutva’ and adopted 
the strategy of mobilising the Hindus.    
Hindutva literally means ‘Hinduness’ and was defined by its 
originator, V. D.  Savarkar, as the basis of Indian (in his language 
also Hindu) nationhood. It basically meant that to be members of the 
Indian nation, everyone must not only accept India as their  ‘fatherland’ 
(pitrubhu) but also as their holy land (punyabhu). Believers of ‘Hindutva’ 
argue that a strong nation can be built only on the basis of a strong and 
united national culture. They also believe that in the case of India the 
Hindu culture alone can provide this base.
Two developments around 1986 became central to the politics of 
BJP as a ‘Hindutva’ party. The first was the Shah Bano case in 1985. 
In this case a 62-year old divorced Muslim woman, had filed a case for 
maintenance from her former husband.  The Supreme Court ruled in 
her favour. The orthodox Muslims saw the Supreme Court’s order as an 
interference in Muslim Personal Law. On the demand of some Muslim 
leaders, the government passed the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights 
on Divorce) Act, 1986 that nullified the Supreme Court’s judgment. This 
action of the government was opposed by many women’s organisations, 
many Muslim groups and most of the intellectuals. The BJP criticised 
this action of the Congress government as an unnecessary concession 
and ‘appeasement’ of the minority community. 
Ayodhya dispute
The second development was the order by the Faizabad district court 
in February 1986. The court ordered that the Babri Masjid premises 
be unlocked so that Hindus could offer prayers at the site which they 
considered as a temple. A dispute had been going on for many decades 
over the mosque known as Babri Masjid at Ayodhya. The Babri Masjid 
was a 16th century mosque in Ayodhya and was built by Mir Baqi – 
Mughal emperor Babur’s General. Some Hindus believe that it was built 
after demolishing a temple for Lord Rama in what is believed to be his 
birthplace. The dispute took the form of a court case and has continued 
for many decades.  In the late 1940s the mosque was locked up as the 
matter was with the court. 
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            185  
As soon as the locks of the Babri Masjid were opened, mobilisation 
began on both sides. Many Hindu and Muslim organisations tried 
to mobilise their communities on this question. Suddenly this local 
dispute became a major national question and led to communal 
tensions. The BJP made this issue its major electoral and political 
plank. Along with many other organisations like the RSS and the 
Vishva Hindu Parishad (VHP), it convened a series of symbolic 
and mobilisational programmes. This large scale mobilisation led to 
surcharged atmosphere and many instances of communal violence. 
The BJP, in order to generate public support, took out a massive march 
called the Rathyatra from Somnath in Gujarat to Ayodhya in UP. 
Demolition and after
In December 1992, the organisations supporting the construction of 
the temple had organised a Karseva, meaning voluntary service by the 
devotees, for building the Ram temple. The situation had become tense 
all over the country and especially at Ayodhya. The Supreme Court had 
ordered the State government to take care that the disputed site will 
not be endangered. However, thousands of people gathered from all 
over the country at Ayodhya on 6 December 1992 and demolished 
the mosque. This news led to clashes between the Hindus and 
Muslims in many parts of the country. The violence in Mumbai 
erupted again in January 1993 and continued 
for over two weeks. 
2018-19
186                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
The events at Ayodhya 
led to a series of other developments. 
The State government, with the BJP as the ruling 
party, was dismissed by the Centre. Along with that, other States 
where the BJP was in power, were also put under President’s rule. 
A case against the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh was registered 
in the Supreme Court for contempt of court since he had given 
an undertaking that the disputed structure will be protected. The 
BJP officially expressed regret over the happenings at Ayodhya. 
The central government appointed a commission to investigate into 
the circumstances leading to the demolition of the mosque. Most 
political parties condemned the demolition and declared that this 
was against the principles of secularism. This led to a serious debate 
over secularism and posed the kind of questions our country faced 
immediately after Partition – was India going to be a country where 
the majority religious community dominated over the minorities? 
Or would India continue to offer equal protection of law and equal 
citizenship rights to all Indians irrespective of their religion? 
 During this time, there has also been a debate about using 
religious sentiments for electoral purposes. India’s democratic 
politics is based on the premise that all religious communities enjoy 
the freedom that they may join any party and that there will not be 
Credit (Clockwise): 
The Pioneer, The Pioneer 
and The Statesman. 
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            187  
community-based political parties. This democratic atmosphere of 
communal amity has faced many challenges since 1984. As we have 
read in Chapter Eight, this happened in 1984 in the form of anti-Sikh 
riots. In February-March 2002, similar violence broke out against the 
Muslims in Gujarat.  Such violence against the minority community 
and violence between two communities is a threat to democracy. 
                    T e e proceedings have the e ho o  the disastrous event that ended in the demolition on the 6th De ember, 
1992 o  the disputed structure o  ‘Ram Janam Bhoomi-Babri Masjid’ in Ayodhya.  T ousands o  innocent live  o  
citizens were lost, e  ensive damage to property caused and more than all a damage to the image o  this great land 
as one fostering great traditions o  tolerance, faith, bro herhood amongst the various communitie  inhabiting the 
land was impaired in the international scene.
It is unhap y that a leader o  a political party and the Chief Miniﬆ er has to be convic ed o  an o  ence o  Contempt 
o  Court.  But it has to be done to uphold the maje ty o  law.  We convic  him o  the o  ence o  contempt o  Court.  
Since the contempt raise  larger is ue  w ich aﬀ e c the very foundation o  the se ular fabric o  our nation, we also 
sentence him to a token imprisonment o  one day.
Chief Justice Venkatachaliah and Justice G.N. Ray  of  Supreme Court
Observations in a judgement on the failure of the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh to keep the promise that he 
had made before the National Integration Council to protect the ‘Ram Janam Bhumi-Babri Masjid’ structure, 
Mohd. Aslam v. Union of India, 24 October 1994
Gujarat riots
In 
February-March 
2002, 
large-scale 
violence took place in Gujarat. The 
immediate provocation for this violence 
was an incident that took place at a 
station called Godhra. A bogey of a train 
that was returning from Ayodhya and was 
full of Karsevaks was set on fire.  Fifty- 
seven people died in that fire. Suspecting 
the hand of the Muslims in setting fire 
to the bogey, large-scale violence against 
Muslims began in many parts of Gujarat 
from the next day. This violence continued 
for almost a whole month. Nearly 1100 
persons, mostly Muslims, were killed 
in this violence. The National Human 
Rights Commission criticised the Gujarat 
government’s role in failing to control 
violence, provide relief to the victims and 
prosecute the perpetrators of this violence. 
The Election Commission of India ordered 
the assembly elections to be postponed. 
As in the case of anti-Sikh riots of 1984, 
“
“
2018-19
188                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
               On 27 February1947, 
at the very ﬁ rst mee ing o  
the Advisory Commit ee o  
the Constituent As embly on 
Fundamental Rights, Minoritie  
and Tribals and Excluded Areas, 
Sardar Patel a  erted: 
“It is for us to prove that it is a 
bogus claim, a false claim, and 
that nobody can be more intere ted 
than us, in India, in the pro ec ion 
o  our minoritie .  Our mis ion is 
to satisfy every one o  them.  Le  
us prove we can rule ourselve  
and we have no ambition to rule 
o hers”. 
“T e tragic events in Gujarat, 
starting with the Godhra incident 
and continuing with the violence 
that rocked the state for over two 
months, have greatly saddened 
the nation.  T ere is no doubt, in 
the opinion o  the Commis ion, 
that there was a comprehensive 
failure on the part o  the state 
government to control the 
persiﬆ ent violation o  the rights 
to life, liberty, equality and dignity 
o  the people o  the state.  It is, 
o  course, e  ential to heal the 
wounds and to look to a future 
o  peace and harmony.  But the 
pursuit o  the e high ob ec ive  
must be based on justice and 
upholding o  the value  o  the 
constitution o  the republic and 
the laws o  the land.
National Human Rights 
Commission, Annual Report 
2001-2002.   
“
“
Can 
we ensure 
that those 
who plan, execute 
and support such 
massacres are brought 
to the book? Or at 
least punished 
politically?
Is this going 
to continue to be our 
future? Is there no way we 
can make all this a matter of 
past?
Can
we ensure 
that those 
who plan execute
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            189  
                My one me  age 
to the Chief Miniﬆ er [o  
Gujarat] is that he should 
follow ‘raj dharma’. A 
ruler should no  make any 
discrimination be ween his 
sub ec s on the basis o  caste, 
creed and religion.
Prime Minister Atal Behari 
Vajpayee, Ahmedabad, 
4 April 2002. 
Gujarat riots show that the governmental machinery also becomes 
susceptible to sectarian passions. Instances, like in Gujarat, alert 
us to the dangers involved in using religious sentiments for political 
purposes.  This poses a threat to democratic politics.
Emergence o  a new consensus
The period after 1989 is seen sometimes as the period of decline of 
Congress and rise of BJP. If you want to understand the complex 
nature of political competition in this period, you have to compare the 
electoral performances of the Congress and the BJP. “
“
Now let us try to understand the meaning of the information given in 
the figure. 
• 
You will notice that BJP and Congress were engaged in a tough 
competition in this period. What is the difference between 
2018-19
190                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
their electoral fortunes if you compare these with the 1984 
elections?  
.• You will notice that since the 1989 election, the votes polled by 
the two parties, Congress and the BJP do not add up to more than 
fifty per cent. The seats won by them too, do not add up to more 
than half the seats in the Lok Sabha. So, where did the rest of the 
votes and seats go?  
• 
Look at both the charts showing Congress and Janata ‘family’ of 
parties. Which among the parties that exist today are neither part 
of Congress family of parties nor part of Janata family of parties? 
• 
The political competition during the nineties is divided between 
the coalition led by BJP and the coalition led by the Congress. 
Can you list the parties that are not part of any of these two 
coalitions? 
Lok Sabha Elections 2004
In the elections of 2004, the Congress party too entered into coalitions 
in a big way. The NDA was defeated and a new coalition government 
led by the Congress, known as the United Progressive Alliance came to 
power. This government received support from the Left Front parties. 
The elections of 2004 also witnessed the partial revival of Congress 
party. It could increase its seats for the first time since 1991. However, 
in the 2004 elections, there was a negligible difference between the 
votes polled by the Congress and its allies and the BJP and its allies. 
Thus, the party system has now changed almost dramatically from 
what it was till the seventies. 
The political processes that are unfolding around us after the 
1990s show the emergence of broadly four groups of parties – parties 
that are in coalition with the Congress; parties that are in alliance 
with the BJP; Left Front parties; and other parties who are not part of 
any of these three. The situation suggests that political competition 
will be multi-cornered.  By implication the situation also assumes a 
divergence of political ideologies. 
Growing consensus
However, on many crucial issues, a broad agreement has emerged 
among most parties. In the midst of severe competition and many 
conflicts, a consensus appears to have emerged among most parties. 
This consensus consists of four elements. 
F
irst, agreement on new economic policies – while many groups 
are opposed to the new economic policies,  most political parties 
are in support of the  new economic policies. Most parties believe 
that these policies would lead the country to prosperity and a status 
of economic power in the world. 
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            191  
S
econd,  acceptance of the political and social claims of the 
backward castes – political parties have recognised that the 
social and political claims of the backward castes need to be 
accepted. As a result, all political parties now support reservation 
of seats for the ‘backward classes’ in education and employment. 
Political parties are also willing to ensure that the OBCs get adequate 
share of power.
Note: This illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to be an authentic 
depiction of India’s external boundaries. 
2018-19
192                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
T
hird, acceptance of the role of State level parties in governance 
of the country – the distinction between State level and national 
level parties is fast becoming less important. As we saw in this 
chapter, State level parties are sharing power at the national level 
and have played a central role in the country’s politics of last twenty 
years or so.  
F
ourth, emphasis on pragmatic considerations rather than 
ideological positions and political alliances without ideological 
agreement – coalition politics has shifted the focus of political 
parties from ideological differences to power sharing arrangements. 
Thus, most parties of the NDA did not agree with the ‘Hindutva’ 
ideology of the BJP. Yet, they came together to form a government 
and remained in power for a full term.  
All these are momentous changes and are going to shape politics 
in the near future. We started this study of politics in India with the 
discussion of how the Congress emerged as a dominant party. From 
that situation, we have now arrived at a more competitive politics, 
but politics that is based on a certain implicit agreement among 
the main political actors. Thus, even as political parties act within 
the sphere of this consenus, popular movements and organisations 
are simultaneously identifying new forms, visions and pathways of 
development. Issues like poverty, displacement, minimum wages, 
livelihood and social security are being put on the political agenda 
by peoples’ movements, reminding the state of its responsibility. 
Similarly, issues of justice and democracy are being voiced by the 
people in terms of class, caste, gender and regions.  We cannot predict 
the future of democracy. All we know is that democratic politics is 
here to stay in India and that it will unfold through a continuous 
churning of some of the factors mentioned in this chapter.
Or may be 
the real question 
is – will democracy 
offer meaningful 
political choices? 
That 
is my 
question – will 
democracy 
survive?
Credit: Ravishankar/India Today
1990: Will V. P. 
Singh survive?
November 1990: 
Will Shekhar 
survive?
June 1991: Will 
Rao survive?
June 1996: Will 
Gowda survive?
April 1997: Will 
Gujral survive?
March 1998: Will 
Vajpayee survive?
2000: 
Will India 
survive?
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            193  
Party Position in 16th Lok Sabha 
(As on 19.02.2015)
Source: http://loksabha.nic.in
2018-19
194                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
1.  Unscramble a bunch of disarranged press clipping file of Unni-Munni… 
and arrange the file chronologically. 
  
(a)  
Mandal Recommendations and Anti Reservation Stir
  
(b)  
Formation of the Janata Dal
  
(c)  
The demolition of Babri Masjid 
  
(d)  
Assassination of Indira Gandhi  
 
  
(e)  
The formation of NDA government
  
(f)  
Godhra incident and its fallout 
  
(g)  
Formation of the UPA government 
2.  Match the following. 
  
(a) Politics of Consensus   
 
  
i.  Shah Bano case
  
(b) Caste based parties 
 
 
 
ii.  Rise of OBCs
  
(c) Personal Law and   
 
 
 
iii.  Coalition government 
  
 
Gender Justice  
 
 
 
 
  
(d) Growing strength of  
 
 
 
iv.  Agreement on Economic
  
 
Regional parties    
 
 
 
 
policies
3.  State the main issues in Indian politics in the period after 1989. What 
different configurations of political parties these differences lead to?
4.  “In the new era of coalition politics, political parties are not aligning or re-
aligning on the basis of ideology.” What arguments would you put forward 
to support or oppose this statement?
5.  Trace the emergence of BJP as a significant force in post-Emergency 
politics. 
6.  In spite of the decline of Congress dominance, the Congress party 
continues to influence politics in the country. Do you agree? Give reasons. 
7.  Many people think that a two-party system is required for successful 
democracy. Drawing from India’s experience of last 30 years, write an 
essay on what advantages the present party system in India has. 
8.   Read the passage and answer the questions below:
  
Party politics in India has confronted numerous challenges. Not only 
has the Congress system destroyed itself, but the fragmentation of  the 
Congress coalition has triggered a new emphasis on self-representation 
which raises questions about the party system and its capacity to 
accommodate diverse interests, …. . An important test facing the polity is 
to evolve a party system or political parties that can effectively articulate 
and aggregate a variety of interests. — ZOYA HASAN 
EXERCISES
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            195  
 
 
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            195  
(a) 
Write a short note on what the author calls challenges of the 
party system in the light of what you have read in this chapter. 
(b) 
Given an example from this chapter of the lack of accommodation 
and aggregation mentioned in this passage.
(c) 
Why is it necessary for parties to accommodate and aggregate 
variety of interests?
LET US DO IT TOGETHER
•  
This chapter covers the major developments in Indian politics until the 
2004 Elections (14th Lok Sabha). Subsequently, the Lok Sabha elections 
were held in 2009, during which the UPA led by the Congress won. In 
the 2014 Elections, the NDA led by the BJP emerged victorious. The 
position of various parties in the 16th Lok Sabha is given on page 193.
•  
A detailed study of Members of the 16th Lok Sabha is available on the 
website of the Lok Sabha (http://loksabha.nic.in).
•  
Compare and contrast the electoral performances of various political 
parties in the 2009 Elections (15th Lok Sabha) and the 2014 Elections 
(16th Lok Sabha) by collecting the data about the results from the 
website of the Election Commission of India (http://eci.nic.in). 
•  
Prepare a timeline of the major political events in India since 2004. 
Share and discuss it in your classroom.
2018-19
2018-19