In the first chapter of this book we studied the 
process of ‘nation-building’ in the first decade 
after Independence. But nation-building is 
not something that can be accomplished 
once and for all times to come. In the course 
of time new challenges came up. Some of the 
old problems had never been fully resolved. 
As democratic experiment unfolded, people 
from different regions began to express 
their aspirations for autonomy. Sometimes 
these aspirations were expressed outside 
the framework of the Indian union. These 
involved long struggles and often aggressive 
and armed assertions by the people. 
This new challenge came to the fore in the 
1980s, as the Janata experiment came to an 
end and there was some political stability at 
the centre. This decade will be remembered 
for some major conflicts and accords in the 
various regions of the country, especially 
in Assam, the Punjab, Mizoram and the 
developments in Jammu and Kashmir. In 
this chapter we study these cases so as to 
ask some general questions.
• 
Which factors contribute to the tensions 
arising out of regional aspirations? 
• 
How has the Indian state responded to 
these tensions and challenges?
• 
What kind of difficulties are faced in 
balancing democratic rights and national 
unity? 
• 
What are the lessons here for achieving 
unity with diversity in a democracy?
Regional aspirations 
are usually expressed 
in the language of the 
region and addressed 
to the local population 
or the rulers. This 
unusual poster from 
Uttarakhand movement 
appeals to all the 
Indian citizens in seven 
different languages 
and thus underscores 
the compatibility of the 
regional aspirations with 
nationalist sentiments. 
2018-19
8
chapter
regional 
aspirations
Region and the Nation
1980s may be seen as a period of rising regional aspirations for 
autonomy, often outside the framework of the Indian Union.  These 
movements frequently involved armed assertions by the people, 
their repression by the government, and a collapse of the political 
and electoral processes.  It is also not surprising that most of these 
struggles were long drawn and concluded in negotiated settlements 
or accords between the central government and the groups leading 
the movement for autonomy. The accords were reached after a 
process of dialogue that aimed to settle contentious issues within the 
constitutional framework.  Yet the journey to the accord was always 
tumultuous and often violent. 
Indian approach
In studying the Indian Constitution and the process of nation-building 
we have repeatedly come across one basic principle of the Indian 
approach to diversity – the Indian nation shall not deny the rights of 
different regions and linguistic groups to retain their own culture. We 
decided to live a united social life without losing the distinctiveness 
of the numerous cultures that constituted it.  Indian nationalism 
sought to balance the principles of unity and diversity. The nation 
would not mean the negation of the region. In this sense the Indian 
approach was very different from the one adopted in many European 
countries where they saw cultural diversity as a threat to the nation.
India adopted a democratic approach to the question of diversity. 
Democracy allows the political expressions of regional aspirations 
and does not look upon them as anti-national. 
Besides, democratic politics allows parties and groups 
to address the people on the basis of their regional 
identity, aspiration and specific regional problems. 
Thus, in the course of democratic politics, regional 
aspirations get strengthened. At the same time, 
democratic politics also means that regional issues 
and problems will receive adequate attention and 
accommodation in the policy making process.  
Such an arrangement may sometimes lead to 
tensions and problems. Sometimes, the concern for 
national unity may overshadow the regional needs 
Does it mean 
that regionalism is 
not as dangerous as 
communalism? Or may 
be, not dangerous at 
all?
2018-19
150                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
and aspirations.  At other times a concern for region alone may 
blind us to the larger needs of the nation. Therefore, political 
conflicts over issues of power of the regions, their rights and 
their separate existence are common to nations that want to 
respect diversity while trying to forge and retain unity. 
Areas of tension
In the first chapter you have seen how immediately after 
Independence our nation had to cope with many difficult issues 
like Partition, displacement, integration of Princely States, 
reorganisation of states and so on. Many observers, both within 
the country and from outside, had predicted that India as one 
unified country cannot last long. Soon after Independence, 
the issue of Jammu and Kashmir came up. It was not only a 
conflict between India and Pakistan. More than that, it was a 
question of the political aspirations of the people of Kashmir 
valley. Similarly, in some parts of the north-east, there was no 
consensus about being a part of India. First Nagaland and then 
Mizoram witnessed strong movements demanding separation 
from India. In the south, some groups from the Dravid movement 
briefly toyed with the idea of a separate country. 
These events were followed by mass agitations in many parts 
for the formation of linguistic States. Today’s Andhra Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Maharashtra, and Gujarat were among the regions 
affected by these agitations. In some parts of southern India, 
particularly Tamil Nadu, there were protests against making 
Hindi the official national language of the country. In the 
north, there were strong pro-Hindi agitations demanding that 
Hindi be made the official language immediately. From the late 
1950s, people speaking the Punjabi language started agitating 
for a separate State for themselves. This demand was finally 
accepted and the States of Punjab and Haryana were created 
in 1966. Later, the States of Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand and 
Jharkhand were created. Thus the challenge of diversity was 
met by redrawing the internal boundaries of the country.
Yet this did not lead to resolution of all problems and for 
all times. In some regions, like Kashmir and Nagaland, the 
challenge was so complex that it could not be resolved in the 
first phase of nation-building. Besides, new challenges came 
up in States like Punjab, Assam and Mizoram. Let us study 
these cases in some detail. In this process let us also go back 
to some of the earlier instances of difficulties of nation building. 
The successes and failures in these cases are instructive not 
merely for a study of our past, but also for an understanding 
of India’s future.
Why does the 
challenge always 
come from the border 
States? 
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       151  
Jammu and Kashmir
You may have heard about the 
violence in Jammu and Kashmir 
(J&K). This has resulted in 
the loss of many lives and the 
displacement of many families. 
The ‘Kashmir issue’ is always 
seen as a major issue between 
India and Pakistan. But the 
political situation in the State 
has many dimensions. 
Jammu 
and 
Kashmir 
comprises 
three 
social 
and 
political 
regions: 
Jammu, 
Kashmir and Ladakh. The heart 
of the Kashmir region is the 
Kashmir valley; the people are 
Kashmiri speaking and mostly 
Muslim with a small Kashmiri 
speaking 
Hindu 
minority. 
Jammu region is a mix of 
foothills and plains, of Hindus, 
Muslims and Sikhs and speakers of various languages. The Ladakh 
region is mountainous, has very little population which is equally 
divided between Buddhists and Muslims.
The ‘Kashmir issue’ is not just a dispute between India and 
Pakistan. This issue has external and internal dimensions. It 
involves the issue of Kashmiri identity known as Kashmiriyat and the 
aspirations of the people of J&K for political autonomy. 
Roots of the problem
Before 1947, Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) was a Princely State.  Its 
Hindu ruler, Hari Singh, did not want to merge with India and tried to 
negotiate with India and Pakistan to have an independent status for 
his state. The Pakistani leaders thought the Kashmir region ‘belonged’ 
to Pakistan, since majority population of the State was Muslim. 
But this is not how the people themselves saw it – they thought of 
themselves as Kashmiris above all.  The popular movement in the 
State, led by Sheikh Abdullah of the National Conference, wanted to 
get rid of the Maharaja, but was against joining Pakistan. The National 
Conference was a secular organisation and had a long association 
with the Congress. Sheikh Abdullah was a personal friend of some of 
the leading nationalist leaders including Nehru. 
In October 1947, Pakistan sent tribal infiltrators from its side 
to capture Kashmir. This forced the Maharaja to ask for Indian 
military help. India extended the military support and drove back 
In that 
case, why don’t 
they rename the 
State as “Jammu, 
Kashmir and Ladakh”? 
Besides, JKL makes 
for an easy 
abbreviation!
Note: This illustration 
is not a map drawn to 
scale and should not be 
taken to be an authentic 
depiction of India’s 
external boundaries. 
2018-19
152                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
Dravidian movement
‘Vadakku Vaazhkirathu; Therkku Thaeikirathu’ 
[The north thrives even as the south decays]. 
This popular slogan sums up the dominant 
sentiments of one of India’s most effective 
regional movements, the Dravidian movement, 
at one point of time. This was one of the 
first regional movements in Indian politics. 
Though some sections of this movement 
had ambitions of creating a Dravida nation, 
the movement did not take to arms.  It used 
democratic means like public debates and the 
electoral platform to achieve its ends. This 
strategy paid off as the movement acquired 
political power in the State and also became 
influential at the national level. 
The Dravidian movement led to the formation of 
Dravidar Kazhagam [DK] under the leadership 
of  Tamil social reformer E.V. Ramasami 
‘Periyar’. The organisation strongly opposed 
the Brahmins’ dominance and affirmed 
regional pride against the political, economic 
and cultural domination of the North. Initially, 
the Dravidian movement spoke in terms of
the whole of south India; however lack of support from other States limited the 
movement to Tamil Nadu.
The DK split and the political legacy of the 
movement was transferred to Dravida 
Munnetra 
Kazhagam 
(DMK). The DMK made 
its entry into politics 
with a three pronged 
agitation 
in 
1953-54. 
First, it demanded the 
restoration of the original 
name of Kallakudi railway 
station which had been 
renamed 
Dalmiapuram, 
after an industrial house 
from the North.  This demand 
brought out its opposition to 
the North Indian economic 
and cultural symbols. The 
second 
agitation 
was 
for 
pololitititicicicalalalalalal
leg
eg
eg
e ac
ac
ac
ac
acy y y
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
o
the
he
he
h
d to 
o Dr
Dr
D av
av
avididida 
a 
a 
a
, 
e 
e
d 
to 
o
mi
mic
Th
The 
e 
e
for
or
o  
E.V. 
Ramasami 
Naicker 
(1879-1973): 
Known as 
Periyar (the 
respected); 
strong 
supporter of 
atheism; famous for his anti-
caste struggle and rediscovery 
of Dravidian identity; initially 
a worker of the Congress 
party; started the self-respect 
movement (1925); led the 
anti-Brahmin movement; 
worked for the Justice party 
and later founded Dravidar 
Kazhagam; opposed to Hindi 
and domination of north India; 
propounded the thesis that 
north Indians and Brahmins 
are Aryans.
Anti-Hindi agitation in Tamil Nadu, 1965
Credit: The Hindu
152                                                                 
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       153  
giving Tamil cultural history greater importance in school curricula. 
The third agitation was against the craft education scheme of the State 
government, which it alleged was linked to the Brahmanical social 
outlook. It also agitated against making Hindi the country’s official 
language. The success of the anti-Hindi agitation of 1965 added to the 
DMK’s popularity.
Sustained political agitations brought the DMK to power in the Assembly 
elections of 1967. Since then, the Dravidian parties have dominated 
the politics of Tamil Nadu. Though  the DMK split after the death of 
its leader, C. Annadurai,  the influence of Dravidian parties in Tamil 
politics actually increased. After the split there were two parties – the 
DMK and the All India Anna DMK (AIADMK) – that claimed Dravidian 
legacy. Both these parties have dominated politics in Tamil Nadu for 
the last four decades. Since 1996, one of these parties has been a part 
of the ruling coalition at the Centre. In the 1990s, many other parties 
have emerged. These include Marumalarchchi Dravida Munnetra 
Kazhagam (MDMK), Pattali Makkal Katchi (PMK) and Desiya Murpokku 
Dravidar Kazhagam (DMDK). All these parties have kept alive the issue 
of regional pride in the politics of Tamil Nadu. Initially seen as a threat 
to Indian nationalism, regional politics in Tamil Nadu is a good example 
of the compatibility of regionalism and nationalism.
                                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       153  
2018-19
154                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
the infiltrators from Kashmir valley, but only after the 
Maharaja had signed an ‘Instrument of Accession’ with 
the Government of India.  It was also agreed that once the 
situation normalised, the views of the people of J&K will 
be ascertained about their future. Sheikh Abdullah took 
over as the Prime Minister of the State of J&K (the head 
of the government in the State was then called Prime 
Minister) in March 1948. India agreed to maintain the 
autonomy of Jammu and Kashmir.
External and internal disputes
Since then, the politics of Jammu and Kashmir always 
remained controversial and conflict ridden both for 
external and internal reasons. Externally, Pakistan has 
always claimed that Kashmir valley should be part of 
Pakistan. As we noted above, Pakistan sponsored a tribal 
invasion of the State in 1947, as a consequence of which 
one part of the State came under Pakistani control. India 
claims that this area is under illegal occupation. Pakistan 
describes this area as ‘Azad Kashmir’. Ever since 1947, 
Sheikh 
Mohammad 
Abdullah 
(1905-1982): 
Leader of Jammu 
and Kashmir; 
proponent of 
autonomy and 
secularism for 
Jammu and Kashmir; led the 
popular struggle against princely 
rule; opposed to Pakistan due to 
its non-secular character; leader 
of the National Conference; Prime 
Minister of J&K immediately 
after its accession with India in 
1947; dismissed and jailed by 
Government of India from 1953 to 
1964 and again from 1965 to 1968; 
became Chief Minister of the State 
after an agreement with Indira 
Gandhi in 1974.
Credit: Hindustan Times
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       155  
Kashmir has remained a major issue of 
conflict between India and Pakistan.  
Internally, there is a dispute about 
the status of Kashmir within the Indian 
union. You know that Kashmir was given 
a special status by Article 370 in our 
Constitution. You have studied about the 
special provisions under Articles 370 and 
371 last year in Indian Constitution at 
Work. Article 370 gives greater autonomy 
to Jammu and Kashmir compared to 
other States of India. The State has its 
own Constitution.  All provisions of the 
Indian Constitution are not applicable to 
the State. Laws passed by the Parliament 
apply to J&K only if the State agrees. 
This special status has provoked two 
opposite reactions. There is a section 
of  people outside of J&K that believes 
that the special status of the State 
conferred by Article 370 does not allow 
full integration of the State with India. 
This section feels that Article 370 should 
therefore be revoked and J&K should be 
like any other State in India. 
Another section, mostly Kashmiris, 
believe that the autonomy conferred by 
Article 370 is not enough. A section of 
Kashmiris have expressed at least three 
major grievances. First, the promise that 
Accession would be referred to the people 
of the State after the situation created 
by tribal invasion was normalised, has 
not been fulfilled.  This has generated 
the demand for a ‘Plebiscite’. Secondly, 
there is a feeling that the special federal 
status guaranteed by Article 370, has 
been eroded in practice. This has led to 
the demand for restoration of autonomy 
or ‘Greater State Autonomy’. Thirdly, it 
is felt that democracy which is practiced 
in the rest of India has not been similarly 
institutionalised in the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir.  
Let’s watch a Film
ROJA
Tamil film depicting the travails 
of Roja, a newly wed and doting 
wife when her husband, Rishi,  is 
abducted by militants. Rishi is a  
cryptologist who is assigned duty 
in Kashmir to decode the enemy 
messages. As love blossoms 
between the husband and the 
wife, the husband is kidnapped. 
The kidnappers demand that 
their jailed leader, be set free in 
exchange of Rishi.
Roja’s world is shattered and she 
is seen knocking at the doors of 
officials and politicians. Since the 
film has the background of Indo-
Pakistan dispute, it made instant 
appeal. The film was dubbed 
in Hindi and many other Indian 
languages. 
Year: 1992
Director: Maniratnam
Screenplay: Maniratnam
Cast (Hindi version): Madhu, 
Arvind Swamy, Pankaj Kapoor, 
Janagaraj
2018-19
156                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
Politics since 1948
After taking over as the Prime Minister, Sheikh Abdullah initiated 
major land reforms and other policies which benefited ordinary 
people. But there was a growing difference between him and the 
central government about his position on Kashmir’s status. He was 
dismissed in 1953 and kept in detention for a number of years. 
The leadership that succeeded him did not enjoy as much popular 
support and was able to rule the State mainly due to the support of 
the Centre. There were serious allegations of malpractices and rigging 
in various elections.
During most of the period between 1953 and 1974, the Congress 
party exercised a lot of influence on the politics of the State. A 
truncated National Conference (minus Sheikh Abdullah) remained in 
power with the active support of Congress for some time but later it 
merged with the Congress. Thus the Congress gained direct control 
over the government in the State. In the meanwhile, there were several 
attempts to reach an agreement between Sheikh Abdullah and the 
Government of India. Finally, in 1974 Indira Gandhi reached an 
agreement with Sheikh Abdullah and he became the Chief Minister of 
the State. He revived the National Conference which was elected with 
So, Nehru 
kept his personal 
friend in jail for such 
a long period! How did 
they feel about it?
Credit: The Times of India
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       157  
a majority in the assembly elections held in 1977. 
Sheikh Abdullah died in 1982 and the leadership 
of the National Conference went to his son, 
Farooq Abdullah, who became the Chief Minister. 
But he was soon dismissed by the Governor and 
a breakaway faction of the National Conference 
came to power for a brief period.
The dismissal of Farooq Abdullah’s government 
due to the intervention of the Centre generated a 
feeling of resentment in Kashmir. The confidence 
that Kashmiris had developed in the democratic 
processes after the accord between Indira Gandhi 
and Sheikh Abdullah, received a set-back. The 
feeling that the Centre was intervening in politics 
of the State was further strengthened when the 
National Conference in 1986 agreed to have an 
electoral alliance with the Congress, the ruling 
party in the Centre. 
Insurgency and after
It was in this environment that the 1987 Assembly election took 
place. The official results showed a massive victory for the National 
Conference – Congress alliance and Farooq Abdullah returned as Chief 
Minister.  But it was widely believed that the results did not reflect 
popular choice, and that the entire election process was rigged. A 
popular resentment had already been brewing in the State against the 
inefficient administration since early 1980s. This was now augmented 
by the commonly prevailing feeling that democratic processes were 
being undermined at the behest of the Centre. This generated a political 
crisis in Kashmir which became severe with the rise of insurgency. 
By 1989, the State had come in the grip of a militant movement 
mobilised around the cause of a separate Kashmiri nation. The 
insurgents got moral, material and military support from Pakistan. For 
a number of years the State was under President’s rule and effectively 
under the control of the armed forces. Throughout the period from 
1990, Jammu and Kashmir experienced violence at the hands of the 
insurgents and through army action. Assembly elections in the State 
were held only in 1996 in which the National Conference led by Farooq 
Abdullah came to power with a demand for regional autonomy for 
Jammu and Kashmir.  J&K experienced a very fair election in 2002. 
The National Conference failed to win a majority and was replaced by 
People’s Democratic Party (PDP) and Congress coalition government. 
Separatism and beyond
Separatist politics which surfaced in Kashmir from 1989 has taken 
different forms and is made up of various strands.  There is one strand 
                   T e Kashmiris 
were convinced now at 
the se ond de hronement 
o  their elec ed leader [in 
1984] that India would 
never permit them to rule 
themselve .
B. K. Nehru 
Governor of J&K before 
the dismissal of Farooq 
Abdullah’s government. 
“
“
Peace in Kashmir
http://govande.sulekha.com
2018-19
158                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
of separatists who want a separate Kashmiri nation, independent 
of India and Pakistan. Then there are groups that want Kashmir to 
merge with Pakistan. Besides these, there is a third strand which 
wants greater autonomy for the people of the State within the 
Indian union. The idea of autonomy attracts the people of Jammu 
and Ladakh regions in a different way. They often complain of 
neglect and backwardness. Therefore, the demand for intra-State 
autonomy is as strong as the demand for the State autonomy. 
The initial period of popular support to militancy has now given 
way to the urge for peace. The Centre has started negotiations with 
various separatist groups. Instead of demanding a separate nation, 
most of the separatists in dialogue are trying to re-negotiate a 
relationship of the State with India.
Jammu and Kashmir is one of the living examples of plural 
society and politics. Not only are there diversities of all kind 
(religious, cultural, linguistic, ethnic, tribal) but there are also 
divergent political aspirations. However, despite all these diversities 
and divergence on the one hand, and the continued situation of 
conflict on the other, the plural and secular culture of the State 
has remained largely intact.   
Punjab
The decade of 1980s also witnessed major developments in the 
State of Punjab. The social composition of the State changed first 
with Partition and later on after the carving out of Haryana and 
Himachal Pradesh.  While the rest of the country was reorganised 
on linguistic lines in 1950s, Punjab had to wait till 1966 for the 
creation of a Punjabi speaking State. The Akali Dal, which was 
formed in 1920 as the political wing of the Sikhs, had led the 
movement for the formation of a ‘Punjabi suba’. The Sikhs were 
now a majority in the truncated State of Punjab.
Political context
After the reorganisation, the Akalis came to power in 1967 
and then in 1977. On both the occasions it was a coalition 
government. The Akalis discovered that despite the redrawing 
of the boundaries, their political position remained precarious. 
Firstly, their government was dismissed by the Centre mid-way 
through its term. Secondly, they did not enjoy strong support 
among the Hindus. Thirdly, the Sikh community, like all other 
religious communities, was internally differentiated on caste and 
class lines. The Congress got more support among the Dalits, 
whether Hindu or Sikh, than the Akalis. 
It was in this context that during the 1970s a section of Akalis 
began to demand political autonomy for the region. This was 
Master Tara Singh 
(1885-1967): 
Prominent Sikh 
religious and political 
leader;   one of the 
early leaders of the 
Shiromani Gurudwara 
Prabandhak 
Committee (SGPC); 
leader of the Akali 
movement; supporter 
of the freedom 
movement but 
opposed to Congress’ 
policy of negotiating 
only with the Muslims; 
after Independence, 
he was the senior 
most advocate of 
formation of separate 
Punjab State.
This 
is all about 
governments, officials, 
leaders, terrorists… but 
what about the people in 
Kashmir? In a democracy 
we must go by what they 
want, shouldn’t we?
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       159  
reflected in a resolution passed at their conference at Anandpur 
Sahib in 1973. The Anandpur Sahib Resolution asserted regional 
autonomy and wanted to redefine centre-state relationship in the 
country. The resolution also spoke of the aspirations of the Sikh 
qaum (community or nation) and declared its goal as attaining the 
bolbala (dominance or hegemony) of the Sikhs. The Resolution was 
a plea for strengthening federalism, but it could also be interpreted 
as a plea for a separate Sikh nation.
The Resolution had a limited appeal among the Sikh masses. A 
few years later, after the Akali government had been dismissed in 
1980, the Akali Dal launched a movement on the question of the 
distribution of water between Punjab and its neighbouring States. 
A section of the religious leaders raised the question of autonomous 
Sikh identity. The more extreme elements started advocating 
secession from India and the creation of ‘Khalistan’. 
Cycle of violence
Soon, the leadership of the movement passed from the moderate 
Akalis to the extremist elements and took the form of armed 
insurgency. These militants made their headquarters inside the 
Sikh holy shrine, the Golden Temple in Amritsar, and turned it into 
an armed fortress. In June 1984, the Government of India carried 
out ‘Operation Blue Star’, code name for army action in the Golden 
Temple. In this operation, the Government could successfully flush 
out the militants, but it also damaged the historic temple and 
deeply hurt the sentiments of the Sikhs. A large proportion of Sikhs 
in India and abroad saw the military operation as an attack on 
their faith and this gave further impetus to militant and extremist 
groups.  
Still more tragic turn of events complicated the Punjab problem 
further. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi was assassinated on 
31 October 1984  outside her residence by her 
bodyguards. 
Both 
the assassins were 
Sikhs and wanted 
to take revenge for 
Operation Bluestar. 
While 
the 
entire 
country was shocked 
by this development, 
in Delhi and in many 
parts 
of 
northern 
India violence broke 
out 
against 
the 
Sikh 
community. 
The violence against 
the Sikhs continued 
Sant Harchand 
Singh Longowal 
(1932-1985):   
Sikh political 
and religious 
leader; began his 
political career 
in mid-sixties as 
an Akali leader; 
became president 
of Akali Dal in 
1980; reached an 
agreement with 
Prime Minister 
Rajiv Gandhi on 
key demands 
of Akalis; 
assassinated by 
unidentified Sikh 
youth.
2018-19
160                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
for almost a week. More than two 
thousand Sikhs were killed in the 
national capital, the area worst 
affected by this violence. Hundreds 
of Sikhs were killed in other parts of 
the country, especially in places like 
Kanpur, Bokaro and Chas. Many Sikh 
families lost their male members and 
thus suffered great emotional and 
heavy financial loss. What hurt the 
Sikhs most was that the government 
took a long time in restoring normalcy 
and that the perpetrators of this 
violence were not effectively punished. 
Twenty years later, speaking in the 
Parliament in 2005, Prime Minister 
Manmohan Singh expressed regret over 
these killings and apologised to the 
nation for the anti-Sikh violence. 
                 T ere is also 
evidence to show that on 
31-10-84 either mee ings 
were held or persons w o 
could organise at acks 
were contacted and 
were given instructions 
to kill Sikhs and loo  
their house  and shops. 
T e at acks were made 
in a s stematic manner 
and without much fear 
o  the police, almost 
sug e ting that the  were 
a  ured that the  would 
no  be harmed w ile 
commit ing those acts or 
even af er.
Justice Nanavati 
Commission of Inquiry, 
Report, Vol. I, 2005
“
“
Women looking at a wall painting 
depicting Indira Gandhi’s assassination. 
Credit : Raghu Rai
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       161  
Road to peace
After coming to power following the election in 1984, the new Prime 
Minister Rajiv Gandhi initiated a dialogue with moderate Akali 
leaders. In July 1985, he reached an agreement with Harchand 
Singh Longowal, then the President of the Akali Dal. This agreement, 
known as the Rajiv Gandhi - Longowal Accord or the Punjab Accord, 
was a step towards bringing normalcy to Punjab. It was agreed that 
Chandigarh would be transferred to Punjab, a separate commission 
would be appointed to resolve the border dispute between Punjab 
and Haryana, and a tribunal would be set up to decide the sharing 
of Ravi-Beas river water among Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan. The 
agreement also provided for compensation to and better treatment of 
those affected by the militancy in Punjab and the withdrawal of the 
application of Armed Forces Special Powers Act in Punjab. 
However, peace did not come easily or immediately. The cycle 
of violence continued nearly for a decade. Militancy and counter 
insurgency violence led to excesses by the police and violations of 
human rights. Politically, it led to fragmentation of the Akali Dal. The 
central government had to impose President’s rule in the State and 
the normal electoral and political process was suspended. It was not 
easy to restore the political process in the atmosphere of suspicion 
and violence. When elections were held in Punjab in 1992, only 24 
per cent of the electors tuned out to vote. 
Militancy was eventually eradicated by the security forces.  But 
the losses incurred by the people of Punjab – Sikhs and Hindus alike 
– were enormous.  Peace returned to Punjab by the middle of 1990s. 
The alliance of Akali Dal (Badal) and the BJP scored a major victory 
in1997, in the first normal elections in the State in the post-militancy 
era. The State is once again preoccupied with questions of economic 
development and social change.  Though religious identities continue 
to be important for the people, politics has gradually moved back 
along secular lines. 
           I have 
no he itation in 
apologising no  only to 
the Sikh community 
but the w ole Indian 
nation be ause w at 
took place in 1984 is 
the negation o  the 
concept o  nationhood 
and w at is enshrined 
in our Constitution.  
So, I am no  standing 
on any false pre tige.  
On behalf o  our 
Government, on behalf 
o  the entire people o  
this country, I bow my 
head in shame that 
such thing took place.  
But, Sir, there are ebbs, 
there are tide  in the 
aﬀ airs o  nations.  T e 
past is with us.  We 
canno  rewrite the 
past.  But as human 
beings, we have the 
willpower and we have 
the ability to write 
be  er future for all 
o  us.
Prime Minister 
Dr. Manmohan Singh
intervening in Rajya 
Sabha debate on 
11 August 2005
“
“
The Times of 
India brought 
out a special 
mid-day 
edition on the 
day Indira 
Gandhi was 
assassinated.
Credit : Times of India
2018-19
162                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
T e North-East
In the North-East, regional aspirations reached a turning point in 
1980s. This region now consists of seven States, also referred to as 
the ‘seven sisters’. The region has only 4 per cent of the country’s 
population but about twice as much share of its area. A small corridor 
of about 22 kilometers connects the region to the rest of the country. 
Otherwise the region shares boundaries with China, Myanmar and 
Bangladesh and serves as India’s gateway to South East Asia. 
The region has witnessed a lot of change since 1947. Tripura, 
Manipur and Khasi Hills of Meghalaya were erstwhile Princely States 
which merged with India after Independence. The entire region of 
North-East has undergone considerable political reorganisation. 
Nagaland State was created in 1963; Manipur, Tripura and Meghalaya 
in 1972 while Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh became separate 
States only in 1987.  The Partition of India in 1947 had reduced the 
North-East to a land locked region and affected its economy. Cut off 
from the rest of India, the region suffered neglect in developmental 
terms. Its politics too remained insulated. At the same time, most 
States in this region underwent major demographic changes due to 
influx of migrants from neighbouring States and countries.
The isolation of the region, its complex social character and 
its backwardness compared to other parts of the country have all 
resulted in the complicated set of demands from different states of the 
North-East. The vast international 
border and weak communication 
between the North-East and the 
rest of India have further added 
to the delicate nature of politics 
there.  Three issues dominate the 
politics of North-East: demands 
for autonomy, movements for 
secession, and  opposition to 
‘outsiders’. Major initiatives on 
the first issue in the 1970s set 
the stage for some dramatic 
developments on the second and 
the third in the 1980s. 
Demands for autonomy
At independence the entire region 
except 
Manipur 
and 
Tripura 
comprised the State of Assam. 
Demands for political autonomy 
arose when the non-Assamese 
felt that the Assam government 
was imposing Assamese language 
Note: This illustration 
is not a map drawn to 
scale and should not be 
taken to be an authentic 
depiction of India’s 
external boundaries. 
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       163  
on them. There were opposition and protest riots throughout the 
State. Leaders of the major tribal communities wanted to separate 
from Assam. They formed the Eastern India Tribal Union which 
later transformed into a more comprehensive All Party Hill Leaders 
Conference in 1960. They demanded a tribal State to be carved out of 
Assam. Finally instead of one tribal State, several States got carved 
out of Assam. At different points of time the Central Government had 
to create Meghalaya, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh out of Assam. 
Tripura and Manipur were upgraded into States too.  
The reorganisation of the North-East was completed by 1972. But 
this was not the end of autonomy demands in this region. In Assam, 
for example, communities like the Bodos, Karbis and Dimasas wanted 
separate States. They worked for this demand by mobilising public 
opinion and popular movement as well as through insurgency. Often 
the same area was claimed by more than one community. It was not 
possible to go on making smaller and yet smaller States. Therefore, 
some other provisions of our federal set up were used to satisfy their 
autonomy demands while remaining in Assam. Karbis and Dimasas 
have been granted autonomy under District Councils while Bodos 
were recently granted Autonomous Council. 
Secessionist movements
Demands for autonomy were easier to respond to, for these involved 
using the various provisions in the Constitution for accommodation of 
diversities. It was much more difficult when some groups demanded 
a separate country, not in momentary anger but consistently as a 
principled position. The country’s leadership faced this problem for a 
very long time in at least two States in the North-East. A comparison 
of these two cases offers us a lesson in democratic politics.
After Independence, the Mizo Hills area was made an autonomous 
district within Assam. Some Mizos believed that they were never a 
part of British India and therefore did not belong to the Indian union. 
But the movement for secession gained popular support after the 
Assam government failed to respond adequately to the great famine 
of 1959 in Mizo hills. The Mizos’ anger led to the formation of the Mizo 
National Front (MNF) under the leadership of Laldenga. 
In 1966 the MNF started an armed campaign for independence. 
Thus, started a two decade long battle between Mizo insurgents and 
the Indian army. The MNF fought a guerilla war, got support from 
Pakistani government and secured shelter in the then East Pakistan. 
The Indian security forces countered it with a series of repressive 
measures of which the common people were the victims. At one point 
even Air Force was used. These measures caused more anger and 
alienation among the people. 
At the end of two decades of insurgency everyone was a loser. 
This is where maturity of the political leadership at both ends made 
Laldenga 
(1937-1990): 
Founder and 
leader of the 
Mizo National 
Front; turned into 
a rebel after the 
experience of the 
famine in 1959; 
led an armed 
struggle against 
India for two 
decades; reached 
a settlement 
and signed an 
agreement with 
Prime Minister 
Rajiv Gandhi in 
1986; became the 
Chief Minister of 
the newly created 
State of Mizoram.
My friend 
Chon said that 
people in Delhi know 
more about the map of 
Europe than about the 
North-East in our country. 
I think she is right at least 
about my schoolmates.
2018-19
164                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
a difference. Laldenga came back from exile in Pakistan and started 
negotiations with the Indian government. Rajiv Gandhi steered these 
negotiations to a positive conclusion.  In 1986 a peace agreement 
was signed between Rajiv Gandhi and Laldenga. As per this accord 
Mizoram was granted full-fledged statehood  with special powers and 
the MNF agreed to give up secessionist 
struggle. Laldenga took over as the 
Chief Minister. This accord proved 
a turning point in the history of 
Mizoram. Today, Mizoram is one 
of the most peaceful places in the 
region and has taken big strides in 
literacy and development.
The story of Nagaland is similar 
to Mizoram, except that it started 
much earlier and has not yet had 
such a happy ending. Led by Angami 
Zaphu Phizo, a section of the Nagas 
declared independence from India 
way back in 1951. Phizo turned 
down many offers of negotiated 
settlement. The Naga National 
Council launched an armed 
struggle 
for 
sovereignty 
of 
Nagas. After a period of violent 
insurgency a section of the 
Nagas signed an agreement 
with the Government of India 
Credit : Times of India
strug
Chief
a tu
Mizo
of t
reg
lite
to
m
s
Z
Declaration of cease fire by MNF
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       165  
but this was not acceptable to other rebels. The problem in Nagaland 
still awaits a final resolution.
Movements against outsiders
The large scale migration into the North-East gave rise to a special 
kind of problem that pitted the ‘local’ communities against people 
who were seen as ‘outsiders’ or migrants.  These latecomers, either 
from India or abroad are seen as encroachers on scarce resources 
like land and potential competitors to employment opportunities and 
political power. This issue has taken political and sometimes violent 
form in many States of the North-East. 
The Assam Movement from 1979 to 1985 is the best example 
of such movements against ‘outsiders’.  The Assamese suspected 
that there were huge numbers of illegal Bengali Muslim settlers 
from Bangladesh. They felt that unless these foreign nationals are 
detected and deported they would reduce the indigenous Assamese 
into a minority. There were other economic issues too. There was 
widespread poverty and unemployment in Assam despite the 
existence of natural resources like oil, tea and coal. It was felt that 
these were drained out of the State without any commensurate 
benefit to the people.  
In 1979 the All Assam Students’ Union (AASU), a students’ 
group not affiliated to any party, led an anti-foreigner movement. 
The movement was against illegal migrations, against domination 
of Bengalis and other outsiders, and against faulty voters’ register 
that included the names of lakhs of immigrants. The movement 
demanded that all outsiders who had entered the State after 1951 
should be sent back. The agitation followed many novel methods and 
mobilised all sections of Assamese people, drawing support across 
the State. It also involved many tragic and violent incidents leading 
to loss of property and human lives. The movement also tried to 
blockade the movement of trains and the supply of oil from Assam 
to refineries in Bihar. 
Eventually after six years of turmoil, the Rajiv Gandhi-led 
government entered into negotiations with the AASU leaders, 
leading to the signing of an accord in 1985.  According to this 
agreement those foreigners who migrated into Assam during and 
after Bangladesh war and since, were to be identified and deported. 
With the successful completion of the movement, the AASU and the 
Asom Gana Sangram Parishad organised themselves as a regional 
political party called Asom Gana Parishad (AGP). It came to power 
in 1985 with the promise of resolving the foreign national problem 
as well as to build a ‘Golden Assam’.
Assam accord brought peace and changed the face of politics in 
Assam, but it did not solve the problem of immigration. The issue of 
the ‘outsiders’ continues to be a live issue in the politics of Assam 
l
r 
t 
t 
n
r
t
Angami Zapu 
Phizo 
(1904-1990): 
Leader of the 
movement for 
independent 
Nagaland; 
president of Naga 
National Council; 
began an armed 
struggle against the 
Indian state; went 
‘underground’, 
stayed in Pakistan 
and spent the last 
three decades of 
his life in exile in 
UK.
I’ve never 
understood this 
insider-outsider 
business. It’s like the 
train compartment. 
Someone who got 
in before others 
treats others as 
outsiders.
2018-19
166                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
and many other places in the 
North-East. This problem 
is particularly acute, for 
example, in Tripura as the 
original 
inhabitants 
have 
been reduced to being a 
minority in their own land. 
The same feeling informs 
the hostility of the local 
population 
to 
Chakma 
refugees in Mizoram and 
Arunachal Pradesh.
To end the news, here is a look at the 
activities of terrorists in the four regions... 
Punjab, Darjeeling, Delhi, Mizoram
Credit: HT book of Cartoon  Rambabu Mathur
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       167  
Accommodation and National Integration
These  cases  have shown us that even after six decades of Independence, 
some of the issues of national integration are not fully resolved. We 
have seen that regional aspirations ranging from demands of statehood 
and economic development to autonomy and separation keep coming 
up. The period since 1980 accentuated these tensions and tested 
the capacity of democratic politics to accommodate the demands of 
diverse sections of the society.  What lessons can we draw from these 
examples? 
First and the most elementary lesson is that regional aspirations 
are very much a part of democratic politics. Expression of regional 
issues is not an aberration or an abnormal phenomenon. Even 
in smaller countries like the United Kingdom there are regional 
aspirations in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Spain faces 
secessionist movement from the Basques and so does Sri Lanka from 
the Tamils. A large and diverse democracy like India must deal with 
regional aspirations on a regular basis. Nation building is an ongoing 
process.
Sikkim’s merger 
At the time of Independence, Sikkim was a ‘protectorate’ of 
India. It meant that while it was not a part of India, it was also 
not a fully sovereign country. Sikkim’s defence and foreign 
relations were looked after by India, while the power of internal 
administration was with the Chogyal, Sikkim’s monarch. This 
arrangement ran into difficulty as the Chogyal was unable to deal 
with the democratic aspirations of the people. An overwhelming 
majority of Sikkim’s population was Nepali. But the Chogyal was 
seen as perpetuating the rule of a small elite from the minority 
Lepcha-Bhutia community. The anti-Chogyal leaders of both the 
communities sought and got support from the Government of 
India. 
The first democratic elections to Sikkim assembly in 1974 were 
swept by Sikkim Congress which stood for greater integration 
with India. The assembly first sought the status of ‘associate 
state’ and then in April 1975 passed a resolution asking for 
full integration with India. This was followed by a hurriedly 
organised referendum that put a stamp of popular approval on 
the assembly’s request. The Indian Parliament accepted this 
request immediately and Sikkim became the 22nd State of 
the Indian union. Chogyal did not accept this merger and his 
supporters accused the Government of India of foul play and 
use of force. Yet the merger enjoyed popular support and did not 
become a divisive issue in Sikkim’s politics.
Kazi Lhendup Dorji 
Khangsarpa (1904): 
Leader of democracy 
movement in Sikkim; 
founder of Sikkim Praja 
Mandal and later leader of 
the Sikkim State Congress; 
in 1962 founded the Sikkim 
National Congress; after an 
electoral victory, he led the 
movement for integration 
of Sikkim with India; after 
the integration, Sikkim 
Congress merged with the 
Indian National Congress.
2018-19
168                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
The second lesson is that the best way to respond to regional 
aspirations is through democratic negotiations rather than 
through suppression. Look at the situation in the eighties – 
militancy had erupted in Punjab; problems were persisting in the 
North-East; students in Assam were agitating; Kashmir valley 
was on the boil. Instead of treating these as simple law and order 
problems, the Government of India reached negotiated settlement 
with regional movements. This produced a reconciliation which 
reduced the tensions existing in many regions. The example of 
Mizoram shows how political settlement can resolve the problem 
of separatism effectively. 
The third lesson is about the significance of power sharing. It 
is not sufficient to have a formal democratic structure. Besides 
that, groups and parties from the region need to be given share 
in power at the State level. Similarly, it is not sufficient to say 
that the states or the regions have autonomy in their matters. 
The regions together form the nation. So, the regions must have 
a share in deciding the destiny of the nation. If regions are not 
given a share in the national level decision making, the feeling of 
injustice and alienation can spread.
The fourth lesson is that regional imbalance in economic 
development contributes to the feeling of regional discrimination. 
Regional imbalance is a fact of India’s development experience. 
Naturally, the backward states or backward regions in some 
states feel that their backwardness should be addressed on 
priority basis and that the policies of the Indian government have 
caused this imbalance. If some states remain poor and others 
develop rapidly, it leads to regional imbalances and inter-regional 
migrations.
Finally, these cases make us appreciate the farsightedness 
of the makers of our Constitution in dealing with questions 
of diversity. The federal system adopted by India is a flexible 
arrangement. While most of the states have equal powers, there 
are special provisions for some states like J&K and the states in 
the North-East. The Sixth Schedule of the Constitution allows 
different tribes complete autonomy of preserving their practices 
and customary laws.  These provisions proved crucial in resolving 
some very complex political problems in the North-East.
What distinguishes India from many other countries that face 
similar challenges is that the constitutional framework in India 
is much more flexible and accommodative. Therefore, regional 
aspirations are not encouraged to espouse separatism. Thus, 
politics in India has succeeded in accepting regionalism as part 
and parcel of democratic politics.
Rajiv Gandhi 
(1944-1991): Prime 
Minister of India 
between 1984 and 
1989; son of Indira 
Gandhi; joined active 
politics after 1980; 
reached agreements 
with militants in 
Punjab, Mizoram and 
the students’ union in 
Assam; pressed for a 
more open economy 
and computer 
technology; sent 
Indian Army 
contingent on 
the request 
of Sri Lankan 
government, to sort 
out the Sinhala-
Tamil conflict;  
assassinated by 
suspected LTTE 
suicide bomber.  
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       169  
Goa’s liberation
Although the British empire in India came to an end in 1947, Portugal refused to withdraw from 
the territories of Goa, Diu and Daman which were under its colonial rule since the sixteenth 
century. During their long rule, the Portuguese suppressed the people of Goa, denied them 
civil rights, and carried out forced religious conversions. After India’s Independence, the Indian 
government tried very patiently to persuade the Portuguese government to withdraw. There 
was also a strong popular movement within Goa for freedom. They were strengthened by 
socialist satyagrahis from Maharashtra.  Finally, in December 1961, the Government of India 
sent the army which liberated these territories after barely two days of action. Goa, Diu and 
Daman became Union Territory. 
Another complication arose soon. Led by the Maharashtrawadi Gomanatak Party  (MGP) 
one section desired that Goa, as a Marathi speaking area should merge with Maharashtra. 
However, many Goans were keen to retain a separate Goan identity and culture, particularly 
the Konkani language. They were led by the United Goan Party (UGP). In January 1967, 
the Central Government held a special ‘opinion poll’ in Goa asking people to decide if they 
wanted to be part of Maharashtra or remain separate. A referendum-like procedure was used 
to ascertain people’s wishes on this issue. The majority voted in favour of remaining outside 
of Maharashtra. Thus, Goa continued as a Union Territory.  Finally, in 1987, Goa became a 
State of the Indian Union. 
                    
 
 
 
 
  
                                                                    169  
Credit: R.K. Laxman in The Times of India, 
21 April 1954
2018-19
170                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
EXERCISES
  1.  Match the following. 
  
 
 
A                                                           
B     
  
Nature of regional aspirations   
 
States
  
(a)  
Socio-religious identity  
 
 
i. 
Nagaland /Mizoram   
  
 
 
leading to statehood                                
  
(b)  
Linguistic identity and   
 
 
ii. Jharkhand /Chattisgarh
  
 
 
tensions with Centre                   
  
(c)  
Regional imbalance leading  
 
iii.  Punjab  
  
 
 
to demand for Statehood    
  
(d)   
Secessionist demands on   
 
iv.  Tamil Nadu
  
 
 
account of tribal identity        
                                                     
                                    
  2.  Regional aspirations of the people of North-East get expressed 
in different ways. These include movements against outsiders, 
movement for greater autonomy and movement for separate national 
existence. On the map of the North-East, using different shades for 
these three, show the States where these expressions are prominently 
found.
  3.  What were the main provisions of the Punjab accord? In what way 
can they be the basis for further tensions between the Punjab and its 
neighbouring States? 
  4.  Why did the Anandpur Sahib Resolution become controversial?   
  5.  Explain the internal divisions of the State of Jammu and Kashmir and 
describe how these lead to multiple regional aspirations in that State.
  6.  What are the various positions on the issue of regional autonomy for 
Kashmir? Which of these do you think are justifiable? Give reasons for 
your answer.
 
  7.  The Assam movement was a combination of cultural pride and economic 
backwardness. Explain.
  8.  All regional movements need not lead to separatist demands. Explain 
by giving examples from this chapter. 
  9.  Regional demands from different parts of India exemplify the principle 
of unity with diversity. Do you agree? Give reasons.
10.  Read the passage and answer the questions below:
  
One of Hazarika’s songs.. … dwells on the unity theme; the seven 
states of north-eastern India become seven sisters born of the same 
mother. …. ‘Meghalaya went own way…., Arunachal too separated 
170                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
2018-19
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       171  
and Mizoram appeared in Assam’s gateway as a groom to marry 
another daughter.’ ….. …. .. The song ends with a determination to 
keep the unity of the Assamese with other smaller nationalities that 
are left in the present-day Assam – ‘the Karbis and the Mising brothers 
and sisters are our dear ones.’ — SANJIB BARUAH
  
(a) 
Which unity is the poet talking about?
  
(b) 
Why were some States of North-East created separately out of  
 
 
the  erstwhile State of Assam?
  
(c) 
Do you think that the same theme of unity could apply to all the 
 
 
regions of India? Why?
Regional Aspirations                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       171  
2018-19