In this last chapter we take a synoptic view of the last two decades of 
politics in India. These developments are complex, for various kinds of 
factors came together to produce unanticipated outcomes in this period. 
The new era in politics was impossible to foresee; it is still very difficult to 
understand. These developments are also controversial, for these involve 
deep conflicts and we are still too close to the events. Yet we can ask 
some questions central to the political change in this period.
• 
What are the implications of the rise of coalition politics for our 
democracy?
• 
What is Mandalisation all about? In which ways will it change the 
nature of political representation?
• 
What is the legacy of the Ramjanambhoomi movement and the 
Ayodhya demolition for the nature of political mobilisation?
• 
What does the rise of a new policy consensus do to the nature of 
political choices?
The chapter does not answer these questions. It simply gives you the 
necessary information and some tools so that you can ask and answer 
these questions when you are through with this book. We cannot avoid 
asking these questions just because they are politically sensitive, for the 
whole point of studying the history of politics in India since Independence 
is to make sense of our present.
Ups and downs of 
various political parties 
in the 1990s appeared 
to many, like this 
cartoon drawn in 1990, 
as a roller coaster ride. 
Riding the roller coaster 
are Rajiv Gandhi, V. 
P. Singh, L. K. Advani, 
Chandrashekhar, Jyoti 
Basu, N. T. Rama Rao, 
Devi Lal, P. K. Mahanta 
and K. Karunanidhi. 
2018-19
9
chapter
recent 
developments in 
indian politics
Conte   o  the 1990s
You have read in the last chapter that Rajiv Gandhi became the Prime 
Minister after the assassination of Indira Gandhi. He led the Congress 
to a massive victory in the Lok Sabha elections held immediately 
thereafter in 1984. As the decade of the eighties came to a close, the 
country witnessed five developments that were to make a long-lasting 
impact on our politics. 
F
irst the most crucial development of this period was the defeat 
of the Congress party in the elections held in 1989. The party 
that had won as many as 415 seats in the Lok Sabha in 1984 
was reduced to only 197 in this election. The Congress improved 
its performance and came back to power soon after the mid-term 
elections held in 1991. But the elections of 1989 marked the end of 
what political scientists have called the ‘Congress system’. To be sure, 
the Congress remained an important party and ruled the country 
more than any other party even in this period since 1989. But it lost 
the kind of centrality it earlier enjoyed in the party system.
S
econd development was the rise of the ‘Mandal issue’ in national 
politics. This followed the decision by the new National Front 
government in 1990, to implement the recommendation of 
the Mandal Commission that jobs in central government should be 
reserved for the Other Backward Classes. This led to violent ‘anti-
Mandal’ protests in different parts of the country. This dispute between 
the supporters and opponents of OBC reservations was known as the 
‘Mandal issue’ and was to play an important role in shaping politics 
since 1989.
I wish to find 
out if the Congress 
can still bounce back 
to its old glory. 
Congress leader Sitaram Kesri withdrew the crutches of support from Deve 
Gowda’s United Front Government. 
2018-19
174                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
T
hird, the economic policy followed by the various governments 
took a radically different turn. This is known as the initiation 
of the structural adjustment programme or the new economic 
reforms.  Started by Rajiv Gandhi, these changes first became very 
visible in 1991 and radically changed the direction that the Indian 
economy had pursued since Independence. These policies have been 
widely criticised by various movements and organisations. But the 
various governments that came to power in this period have continued 
to follow these.  
I wish to be sure 
if  this phenomenon 
would have a long-term 
effect. 
I am not clear 
if this will make a 
difference to politics, 
especially if everyone has 
the same policy.
Manmohan Singh, the then Finance Minister, with Prime Minister Narsimha Rao, in 
the initial phase of the ‘New Economic Policy’.
A reaction to Mandalisation.
Credit: R. K. Laxman in the Times of India
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            175  
F
ourth, a number of events culminated in the demolition of 
the disputed structure at Ayodhya (known as Babri Masjid) in 
December 1992. This event symbolised and triggered various 
changes in the politics of the country and intensified debates about 
the nature of Indian nationalism and secularism. These developments 
are associated with the rise of the BJP and the politics of ‘Hindutva’.   
F
inally, the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi in May 1991 led to a 
change in leadership of the Congress party. He was assassinated 
by a Sri Lankan Tamil linked to the LTTE  when he was on 
an election campaign tour in Tamil Nadu. In the elections of 1991, 
Congress emerged as the single largest party. Following Rajiv Gandhi’s 
death, the party chose Narsimha Rao as the Prime Minister.   
I wonder how 
this will affect 
political parties!
A reaction to rising communalism.
Leadership in Congress made many headlines.
1 May 1996
25 October 1995
20 August 2001
25 October 2004
2018-19
176                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
Era o  Coalitions
Elections in 1989 led to the defeat of the Congress party but did not 
result in a majority for any other party. Though the Congress was the 
largest party in the Lok Sabha, it did not have a clear majority and 
therefore, it decided to sit in the opposition. The National Front (which 
itself was an alliance of Janata Dal and some other regional parties) 
received support from two diametrically opposite political groups: the 
BJP and the Left Front. On this basis, the National Front formed a 
coalition government, but the BJP and the Left Front did not join in 
this government. 
Decline of Congress
The defeat of the Congress party marked the end of Congress 
dominance over the Indian party system. Do you remember the 
discussion in Chapter Five about the restoration of the Congress 
system? Way back in the late sixties, the dominance of the Congress 
party was challenged; but the Congress under the leadership of Indira 
Gandhi, managed to re-establish its predominant position in politics. 
The nineties saw yet another challenge to the predominant position of 
the Congress. It did not, however, mean the emergence of any other 
single party to fill in its place.  
The National 
Front 
Government 
lead by V. P. 
Singh was 
supported 
by the Left 
(represented 
here by Jyoti 
Basu) as well 
as the BJP 
(represented by 
L. K. Advani)
Credit: Sudhir Tailang /HT Book of Cartoons
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            177  
Thus, began an era of multi-party system. To be sure, a large 
number of political parties always contested elections in our country. 
Our Parliament always had representatives from several political 
parties. What happened after 1989 was the emergence of several 
parties in such a way that one or two parties did not get most of 
the votes or seats. This also meant that no single party secured a 
clear majority of seats in any Lok Sabha election held since 1989 till 
2014. This development initiated an era of coalition governments at 
the Centre, in which regional parties played a crucial role in forming 
ruling alliances. 
 Let’s re-search
Talk to your parents about their memories of the events happening 
since the 1990s. Ask them what they felt were the most significant 
events of the period.  Sit together in groups and draw a comprehensive 
list of the events reported by your parents, see which events get cited 
most, and compare them with what the chapter suggests were the 
most significant. You can also discuss why some events are more 
important for some and not for others.  
Alliance politics
The nineties also saw the emergence of powerful parties and movements 
that represented the Dalit and backward castes (Other Backward 
Classes or OBCs). Many of these parties represented powerful 
regional assertion as well. These parties played an important role in 
the United Front government that came to power in 1996. The United 
Front was similar to the National Front of 1989 for it included Janata 
Dal and several regional parties. This time the BJP did not support 
the government. The United Front government was supported by 
the Congress. This shows how unstable the political equations were. 
In 1989, both the Left and the BJP supported the National Front 
Government because they wanted to keep the Congress out of power. 
In 1996, the Left continued to support the non-Congress government 
but this time the Congress, supported it, as both the Congress and 
the Left wanted to keep the BJP out of power. 
They did not succeed for long, as the BJP continued to 
consolidate its position in the elections of 1991 and 1996. It 
emerged as the largest party in the 1996 election and was invited 
to form the government. But most other parties were opposed to 
its policies and therefore, the BJP government could not secure 
a majority in the Lok Sabha. It finally came to power by leading 
2018-19
178                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
a coalition government from May 1998 to June 1999 and was 
re-elected in October 1999. Atal Behari Vajpayee was the Prime 
Minister during both these NDA governments and his government 
formed in 1999 completed its full term. 
Thus, with the elections of 1989, a long phase of coalition politics 
began in India.  Since then, there have been eleven governments at 
the Centre, all of which have either been coalition governments or 
minority governments supported by other parties, which did not join 
the government. In this new phase, any government could be formed 
only with the participation or support of many regional parties. This 
applied to the National Front in 1989, the United Front in 1996 and 
1997, the NDA in 1997, the BJP-led coalition in 1998, the NDA in 
1999, the UPA in 2004 and 2009.  However, this trend changed in 2014.
Let us connect this development with what we have learnt so far. 
The era of coalition governments may be seen as a long-term trend 
resulting from relatively silent changes that were taking place over 
the last few decades.  
We saw in Chapter Two that in earlier times, it was the Congress 
party itself that was a ‘coalition’ of different interests and different social 
strata and groups.  This gave rise to the term ‘Congress system’. 
A cartoonist’s depiction of the change from one-party dominance to a multi-party 
alliance system.
Credit: Ajit Ninan/India Today
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            179  
CENTRAL GOVERNMENTS SINCE 1989
Note: The blank space is for you to record more information on the major policies, performance and controversies about that government.
For more details about the current
and former Prime Ministers, visit
http://pmindia.gov.in/en
2018-19
180                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
We also saw in Chapter Five that, especially since the late 1960s, 
various sections had been leaving the Congress fold and forming 
separate political parties of their own. We also noted the rise of many 
regional parties in the period after 1977.  While these developments 
weakened the Congress party, they did not enable any single party to 
replace the Congress. 
OK, coalitions 
are the logic of 
democratic politics in 
our kind of society. Does 
that mean that we will 
always have coalitions? Or 
can the national parties 
consolidate their 
positions again?
I am 
not worried 
about whether 
it is a single 
party or coalition 
government. I am 
more worried about 
what they do. Does a 
coalition government 
involve more 
compromises? Can 
we not have bold and 
imaginative policies 
in a coalition?
Political Rise o  Other Backward Cla  e 
One long-term development of this period was the rise of Other 
Backward Classes as a political force. You have already come across 
this term ‘OBC’. This refers to the administrative category ‘Other 
Backward Classes’. These are communities other than SC and ST 
who suffer from educational and social backwardness. These are also 
referred to as ‘backward castes’. We have already noted in Chapter 
Six that the support for the Congress among many sections of the 
‘backward castes’ had declined. This created a space for non-Congress 
parties that drew more support from these communities. You would 
recall that the rise of these parties first found political expression 
at the national level in the form of the Janata Party government in 
1977. Many of the constituents of the Janata Party, like the Bharatiya 
Kranti Dal and the Samyukta Socialist Party, had a powerful rural 
base among some sections of the OBC.
‘Mandal’ implemented
In the 1980s, the Janata Dal brought together a similar combination 
of political groups with strong support among the OBCs. The decision 
of the National Front government to implement the recommendations 
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            181  
of the Mandal Commission further helped in shaping the politics of 
‘Other Backward Classes’. The intense national debate for and against 
reservation in jobs made people from the OBC communities more 
aware of this identity. Thus, it helped those who wanted to mobilise 
these groups in politics. This period saw the emergence of many 
parties that sought better opportunities for OBCs in education and 
employment and also raised the question of the share of power enjoyed 
by the OBCs. These parties claimed that since OBCs constituted a 
large segment of Indian society, it was only democratic that the OBCs 
should get adequate representation in administration and have their 
due share of political power. 
Implementation of Mandal Commission report sparked off agitations and political upheavals.
2018-19
182                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
The Mandal Commission
Reservations for the OBC were in existence in southern States since the 1960s, 
if not earlier. But this policy was not operative in north Indian States. It was 
during the tenure of Janata Party government in 1977-79 that the demand for 
reservations for backward castes in north India and at the national level was 
strongly raised. Karpoori Thakur, the then Chief Minister of Bihar, was a pioneer 
in this direction. His government had introduced a new policy of reservations for 
OBCs in Bihar. Following this, the central government appointed  a Commission 
in 1978 to look into and recommend ways to improve the conditions of the 
backward classes. This was the second time since Independence that the 
government had appointed such a commission. Therefore, this commission 
was officially known as the Second Backward Classes Commission. Popularly, 
the commission is known as the Mandal Commission, after the name of its 
Chairperson, Bindeshwari Prasad Mandal. 
The 
Mandal 
Commission 
was 
set 
up 
to 
investigate the extent of educational and social 
backwardness among various sections of Indian 
society and recommend ways of identifying these 
‘backward classes’.  It was also expected to give 
its recommendations on the ways in which this 
backwardness could be ended.  The Commission 
gave its recommendations in 1980.  By then the 
Janata government had fallen. The Commission 
advised that ‘backward classes’ should be understood 
to mean ‘backward castes’, since many castes, 
other than the Scheduled Castes, were also treated 
as low in the caste hierarchy. The Commission did 
a survey and found that these backward castes had 
a very low presence in both educational institutions 
and in employment in public services. It therefore 
recommended reserving 27 per cent of seats in 
educational institutions and government jobs for 
these groups. The Mandal Commission also made 
many other recommendations, like, land reform, to 
improve the conditions of the OBCs.
In August 1990, the National Front government 
decided to implement one of the recommendations 
of Mandal Commission pertaining to reservations 
for OBCs in jobs in the central government and its 
undertakings. This decision sparked agitations and 
violent protests in many cities of north India. The 
decision was also challenged in the Supreme Court and came to be known 
as the ‘Indira Sawhney case’, after the name of one of the petitioners. In 
November 1992, the Supreme Court gave a ruling upholding the decision of 
the government.  There were some differences among political parties about 
the manner of implementation of this decision. But now the policy of reservation 
for OBCs has support of all the major political parties of the country.
B.P. Mandal 
(1918-1982): M.P. from 
Bihar for 1967-1970 
and 1977-1979; chaired 
the Second Backward 
Classes Commission 
that recommended 
reservations for Other 
Backward Classes; a 
socialist leader from Bihar; 
Chief Minister of Bihar for 
just a month and a half in 
1968; joined the Janata 
Party in 1977.
182                                    
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            183  
Political fallouts
The 1980s also saw the rise of political organisation of the Dalits. 
In 1978 the Backward and Minority Communities Employees 
Federation (BAMCEF) was formed. This organisation was not an 
ordinary trade union of government employees. It took a strong 
position in favour of political power to the ‘bahujan’ – the SC, ST, 
OBC and minorities. It was out of this that the subsequent Dalit 
Shoshit Samaj Sangharsh Samiti and later the Bahujan Samaj 
Party (BSP) emerged under the leadership of Kanshi Ram. The 
BSP began as a small party supported largely by Dalit voters in 
Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. But in 1989 and the 1991 
elections, it achieved a breakthrough in Uttar Pradesh. This was 
the first time in independent India that a political party supported 
mainly by Dalit voters had achieved this kind of political success. 
In fact, the BSP, under Kanshi Ram’s leadership was envisaged 
as an organisation based on pragmatic politics. It derived 
confidence from the fact that the Bahujans (SC, ST, OBC and 
religious minorities)  constituted the majority of the population, 
and were a formidable political force on the strength of their 
numbers.  Since then the BSP has emerged as a major political 
player in the State and has been in government on more than one 
occasion. Its strongest support still comes from Dalit voters, but 
it has expanded its support now to various other social groups. In 
many parts of India, Dalit politics and OBC politics have developed 
independently and often in competition with each other. 
Kanshi Ram 
(1934-2006): 
Proponent 
of Bahujan 
empowerment and 
founder of Bahujan 
Samaj Party (BSP); 
left his central 
government job for 
social and political 
work; founder of 
BAMCEF, DS-4 
and finally the 
BSP in 1984; 
astute political 
strategist, he 
regarded political 
power as master 
key to attaining 
social equality; 
credited with Dalit 
resurgence in north 
Indian States.
Will 
this benefit 
leaders of all the 
backward and Dalit 
communities? Or will the 
gains be monopolised by some 
powerful castes and families 
within these groups?
The real point 
is not the leaders but 
the people! Will this lead 
to better policies and effective 
implementation for the really 
deprived people? Or will it remain 
just a political game?
2018-19
184                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
Communalism, Se ularism, Democracy
The other long-term development during this period was the rise of 
politics based on religious identity, leading to a debate about secularism 
and democracy. We noted in Chapter Six that in the aftermath of the 
Emergency, the Bharatiya Jana Sangh had merged into the Janata 
Party. After the fall of the Janata Party and its break-up, the supporters 
of erstwhile Jana Sangh formed the Bharatiya Janata Party ( BJP) in 
1980. Initially, the BJP adopted a broader political platform than that 
of the Jana Sangh.  It embraced ‘Gandhian Socialism’ as its ideology. 
But it did not get much success in the elections held in 1980 and 1984. 
After 1986, the party began to emphasise the Hindu nationalist element 
in its ideology. The BJP pursued the politics of ‘Hindutva’ and adopted 
the strategy of mobilising the Hindus.    
Hindutva literally means ‘Hinduness’ and was defined by its 
originator, V. D.  Savarkar, as the basis of Indian (in his language 
also Hindu) nationhood. It basically meant that to be members of the 
Indian nation, everyone must not only accept India as their  ‘fatherland’ 
(pitrubhu) but also as their holy land (punyabhu). Believers of ‘Hindutva’ 
argue that a strong nation can be built only on the basis of a strong and 
united national culture. They also believe that in the case of India the 
Hindu culture alone can provide this base.
Two developments around 1986 became central to the politics of 
BJP as a ‘Hindutva’ party. The first was the Shah Bano case in 1985. 
In this case a 62-year old divorced Muslim woman, had filed a case for 
maintenance from her former husband.  The Supreme Court ruled in 
her favour. The orthodox Muslims saw the Supreme Court’s order as an 
interference in Muslim Personal Law. On the demand of some Muslim 
leaders, the government passed the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights 
on Divorce) Act, 1986 that nullified the Supreme Court’s judgment. This 
action of the government was opposed by many women’s organisations, 
many Muslim groups and most of the intellectuals. The BJP criticised 
this action of the Congress government as an unnecessary concession 
and ‘appeasement’ of the minority community. 
Ayodhya dispute
The second development was the order by the Faizabad district court 
in February 1986. The court ordered that the Babri Masjid premises 
be unlocked so that Hindus could offer prayers at the site which they 
considered as a temple. A dispute had been going on for many decades 
over the mosque known as Babri Masjid at Ayodhya. The Babri Masjid 
was a 16th century mosque in Ayodhya and was built by Mir Baqi – 
Mughal emperor Babur’s General. Some Hindus believe that it was built 
after demolishing a temple for Lord Rama in what is believed to be his 
birthplace. The dispute took the form of a court case and has continued 
for many decades.  In the late 1940s the mosque was locked up as the 
matter was with the court. 
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            185  
As soon as the locks of the Babri Masjid were opened, mobilisation 
began on both sides. Many Hindu and Muslim organisations tried 
to mobilise their communities on this question. Suddenly this local 
dispute became a major national question and led to communal 
tensions. The BJP made this issue its major electoral and political 
plank. Along with many other organisations like the RSS and the 
Vishva Hindu Parishad (VHP), it convened a series of symbolic 
and mobilisational programmes. This large scale mobilisation led to 
surcharged atmosphere and many instances of communal violence. 
The BJP, in order to generate public support, took out a massive march 
called the Rathyatra from Somnath in Gujarat to Ayodhya in UP. 
Demolition and after
In December 1992, the organisations supporting the construction of 
the temple had organised a Karseva, meaning voluntary service by the 
devotees, for building the Ram temple. The situation had become tense 
all over the country and especially at Ayodhya. The Supreme Court had 
ordered the State government to take care that the disputed site will 
not be endangered. However, thousands of people gathered from all 
over the country at Ayodhya on 6 December 1992 and demolished 
the mosque. This news led to clashes between the Hindus and 
Muslims in many parts of the country. The violence in Mumbai 
erupted again in January 1993 and continued 
for over two weeks. 
2018-19
186                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
The events at Ayodhya 
led to a series of other developments. 
The State government, with the BJP as the ruling 
party, was dismissed by the Centre. Along with that, other States 
where the BJP was in power, were also put under President’s rule. 
A case against the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh was registered 
in the Supreme Court for contempt of court since he had given 
an undertaking that the disputed structure will be protected. The 
BJP officially expressed regret over the happenings at Ayodhya. 
The central government appointed a commission to investigate into 
the circumstances leading to the demolition of the mosque. Most 
political parties condemned the demolition and declared that this 
was against the principles of secularism. This led to a serious debate 
over secularism and posed the kind of questions our country faced 
immediately after Partition – was India going to be a country where 
the majority religious community dominated over the minorities? 
Or would India continue to offer equal protection of law and equal 
citizenship rights to all Indians irrespective of their religion? 
 During this time, there has also been a debate about using 
religious sentiments for electoral purposes. India’s democratic 
politics is based on the premise that all religious communities enjoy 
the freedom that they may join any party and that there will not be 
Credit (Clockwise): 
The Pioneer, The Pioneer 
and The Statesman. 
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            187  
community-based political parties. This democratic atmosphere of 
communal amity has faced many challenges since 1984. As we have 
read in Chapter Eight, this happened in 1984 in the form of anti-Sikh 
riots. In February-March 2002, similar violence broke out against the 
Muslims in Gujarat.  Such violence against the minority community 
and violence between two communities is a threat to democracy. 
                    T e e proceedings have the e ho o  the disastrous event that ended in the demolition on the 6th De ember, 
1992 o  the disputed structure o  ‘Ram Janam Bhoomi-Babri Masjid’ in Ayodhya.  T ousands o  innocent live  o  
citizens were lost, e  ensive damage to property caused and more than all a damage to the image o  this great land 
as one fostering great traditions o  tolerance, faith, bro herhood amongst the various communitie  inhabiting the 
land was impaired in the international scene.
It is unhap y that a leader o  a political party and the Chief Miniﬆ er has to be convic ed o  an o  ence o  Contempt 
o  Court.  But it has to be done to uphold the maje ty o  law.  We convic  him o  the o  ence o  contempt o  Court.  
Since the contempt raise  larger is ue  w ich aﬀ e c the very foundation o  the se ular fabric o  our nation, we also 
sentence him to a token imprisonment o  one day.
Chief Justice Venkatachaliah and Justice G.N. Ray  of  Supreme Court
Observations in a judgement on the failure of the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh to keep the promise that he 
had made before the National Integration Council to protect the ‘Ram Janam Bhumi-Babri Masjid’ structure, 
Mohd. Aslam v. Union of India, 24 October 1994
Gujarat riots
In 
February-March 
2002, 
large-scale 
violence took place in Gujarat. The 
immediate provocation for this violence 
was an incident that took place at a 
station called Godhra. A bogey of a train 
that was returning from Ayodhya and was 
full of Karsevaks was set on fire.  Fifty- 
seven people died in that fire. Suspecting 
the hand of the Muslims in setting fire 
to the bogey, large-scale violence against 
Muslims began in many parts of Gujarat 
from the next day. This violence continued 
for almost a whole month. Nearly 1100 
persons, mostly Muslims, were killed 
in this violence. The National Human 
Rights Commission criticised the Gujarat 
government’s role in failing to control 
violence, provide relief to the victims and 
prosecute the perpetrators of this violence. 
The Election Commission of India ordered 
the assembly elections to be postponed. 
As in the case of anti-Sikh riots of 1984, 
“
“
2018-19
188                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
               On 27 February1947, 
at the very ﬁ rst mee ing o  
the Advisory Commit ee o  
the Constituent As embly on 
Fundamental Rights, Minoritie  
and Tribals and Excluded Areas, 
Sardar Patel a  erted: 
“It is for us to prove that it is a 
bogus claim, a false claim, and 
that nobody can be more intere ted 
than us, in India, in the pro ec ion 
o  our minoritie .  Our mis ion is 
to satisfy every one o  them.  Le  
us prove we can rule ourselve  
and we have no ambition to rule 
o hers”. 
“T e tragic events in Gujarat, 
starting with the Godhra incident 
and continuing with the violence 
that rocked the state for over two 
months, have greatly saddened 
the nation.  T ere is no doubt, in 
the opinion o  the Commis ion, 
that there was a comprehensive 
failure on the part o  the state 
government to control the 
persiﬆ ent violation o  the rights 
to life, liberty, equality and dignity 
o  the people o  the state.  It is, 
o  course, e  ential to heal the 
wounds and to look to a future 
o  peace and harmony.  But the 
pursuit o  the e high ob ec ive  
must be based on justice and 
upholding o  the value  o  the 
constitution o  the republic and 
the laws o  the land.
National Human Rights 
Commission, Annual Report 
2001-2002.   
“
“
Can 
we ensure 
that those 
who plan, execute 
and support such 
massacres are brought 
to the book? Or at 
least punished 
politically?
Is this going 
to continue to be our 
future? Is there no way we 
can make all this a matter of 
past?
Can
we ensure 
that those 
who plan execute
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            189  
                My one me  age 
to the Chief Miniﬆ er [o  
Gujarat] is that he should 
follow ‘raj dharma’. A 
ruler should no  make any 
discrimination be ween his 
sub ec s on the basis o  caste, 
creed and religion.
Prime Minister Atal Behari 
Vajpayee, Ahmedabad, 
4 April 2002. 
Gujarat riots show that the governmental machinery also becomes 
susceptible to sectarian passions. Instances, like in Gujarat, alert 
us to the dangers involved in using religious sentiments for political 
purposes.  This poses a threat to democratic politics.
Emergence o  a new consensus
The period after 1989 is seen sometimes as the period of decline of 
Congress and rise of BJP. If you want to understand the complex 
nature of political competition in this period, you have to compare the 
electoral performances of the Congress and the BJP. “
“
Now let us try to understand the meaning of the information given in 
the figure. 
• 
You will notice that BJP and Congress were engaged in a tough 
competition in this period. What is the difference between 
2018-19
190                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
their electoral fortunes if you compare these with the 1984 
elections?  
.• You will notice that since the 1989 election, the votes polled by 
the two parties, Congress and the BJP do not add up to more than 
fifty per cent. The seats won by them too, do not add up to more 
than half the seats in the Lok Sabha. So, where did the rest of the 
votes and seats go?  
• 
Look at both the charts showing Congress and Janata ‘family’ of 
parties. Which among the parties that exist today are neither part 
of Congress family of parties nor part of Janata family of parties? 
• 
The political competition during the nineties is divided between 
the coalition led by BJP and the coalition led by the Congress. 
Can you list the parties that are not part of any of these two 
coalitions? 
Lok Sabha Elections 2004
In the elections of 2004, the Congress party too entered into coalitions 
in a big way. The NDA was defeated and a new coalition government 
led by the Congress, known as the United Progressive Alliance came to 
power. This government received support from the Left Front parties. 
The elections of 2004 also witnessed the partial revival of Congress 
party. It could increase its seats for the first time since 1991. However, 
in the 2004 elections, there was a negligible difference between the 
votes polled by the Congress and its allies and the BJP and its allies. 
Thus, the party system has now changed almost dramatically from 
what it was till the seventies. 
The political processes that are unfolding around us after the 
1990s show the emergence of broadly four groups of parties – parties 
that are in coalition with the Congress; parties that are in alliance 
with the BJP; Left Front parties; and other parties who are not part of 
any of these three. The situation suggests that political competition 
will be multi-cornered.  By implication the situation also assumes a 
divergence of political ideologies. 
Growing consensus
However, on many crucial issues, a broad agreement has emerged 
among most parties. In the midst of severe competition and many 
conflicts, a consensus appears to have emerged among most parties. 
This consensus consists of four elements. 
F
irst, agreement on new economic policies – while many groups 
are opposed to the new economic policies,  most political parties 
are in support of the  new economic policies. Most parties believe 
that these policies would lead the country to prosperity and a status 
of economic power in the world. 
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            191  
S
econd,  acceptance of the political and social claims of the 
backward castes – political parties have recognised that the 
social and political claims of the backward castes need to be 
accepted. As a result, all political parties now support reservation 
of seats for the ‘backward classes’ in education and employment. 
Political parties are also willing to ensure that the OBCs get adequate 
share of power.
Note: This illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to be an authentic 
depiction of India’s external boundaries. 
2018-19
192                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
T
hird, acceptance of the role of State level parties in governance 
of the country – the distinction between State level and national 
level parties is fast becoming less important. As we saw in this 
chapter, State level parties are sharing power at the national level 
and have played a central role in the country’s politics of last twenty 
years or so.  
F
ourth, emphasis on pragmatic considerations rather than 
ideological positions and political alliances without ideological 
agreement – coalition politics has shifted the focus of political 
parties from ideological differences to power sharing arrangements. 
Thus, most parties of the NDA did not agree with the ‘Hindutva’ 
ideology of the BJP. Yet, they came together to form a government 
and remained in power for a full term.  
All these are momentous changes and are going to shape politics 
in the near future. We started this study of politics in India with the 
discussion of how the Congress emerged as a dominant party. From 
that situation, we have now arrived at a more competitive politics, 
but politics that is based on a certain implicit agreement among 
the main political actors. Thus, even as political parties act within 
the sphere of this consenus, popular movements and organisations 
are simultaneously identifying new forms, visions and pathways of 
development. Issues like poverty, displacement, minimum wages, 
livelihood and social security are being put on the political agenda 
by peoples’ movements, reminding the state of its responsibility. 
Similarly, issues of justice and democracy are being voiced by the 
people in terms of class, caste, gender and regions.  We cannot predict 
the future of democracy. All we know is that democratic politics is 
here to stay in India and that it will unfold through a continuous 
churning of some of the factors mentioned in this chapter.
Or may be 
the real question 
is – will democracy 
offer meaningful 
political choices? 
That 
is my 
question – will 
democracy 
survive?
Credit: Ravishankar/India Today
1990: Will V. P. 
Singh survive?
November 1990: 
Will Shekhar 
survive?
June 1991: Will 
Rao survive?
June 1996: Will 
Gowda survive?
April 1997: Will 
Gujral survive?
March 1998: Will 
Vajpayee survive?
2000: 
Will India 
survive?
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            193  
Party Position in 16th Lok Sabha 
(As on 19.02.2015)
Source: http://loksabha.nic.in
2018-19
194                                                                 Politics in India since Independence
1.  Unscramble a bunch of disarranged press clipping file of Unni-Munni… 
and arrange the file chronologically. 
  
(a)  
Mandal Recommendations and Anti Reservation Stir
  
(b)  
Formation of the Janata Dal
  
(c)  
The demolition of Babri Masjid 
  
(d)  
Assassination of Indira Gandhi  
 
  
(e)  
The formation of NDA government
  
(f)  
Godhra incident and its fallout 
  
(g)  
Formation of the UPA government 
2.  Match the following. 
  
(a) Politics of Consensus   
 
  
i.  Shah Bano case
  
(b) Caste based parties 
 
 
 
ii.  Rise of OBCs
  
(c) Personal Law and   
 
 
 
iii.  Coalition government 
  
 
Gender Justice  
 
 
 
 
  
(d) Growing strength of  
 
 
 
iv.  Agreement on Economic
  
 
Regional parties    
 
 
 
 
policies
3.  State the main issues in Indian politics in the period after 1989. What 
different configurations of political parties these differences lead to?
4.  “In the new era of coalition politics, political parties are not aligning or re-
aligning on the basis of ideology.” What arguments would you put forward 
to support or oppose this statement?
5.  Trace the emergence of BJP as a significant force in post-Emergency 
politics. 
6.  In spite of the decline of Congress dominance, the Congress party 
continues to influence politics in the country. Do you agree? Give reasons. 
7.  Many people think that a two-party system is required for successful 
democracy. Drawing from India’s experience of last 30 years, write an 
essay on what advantages the present party system in India has. 
8.   Read the passage and answer the questions below:
  
Party politics in India has confronted numerous challenges. Not only 
has the Congress system destroyed itself, but the fragmentation of  the 
Congress coalition has triggered a new emphasis on self-representation 
which raises questions about the party system and its capacity to 
accommodate diverse interests, …. . An important test facing the polity is 
to evolve a party system or political parties that can effectively articulate 
and aggregate a variety of interests. — ZOYA HASAN 
EXERCISES
2018-19
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            195  
 
 
Re ent Developments in Indian Politics     
 
 
                                            195  
(a) 
Write a short note on what the author calls challenges of the 
party system in the light of what you have read in this chapter. 
(b) 
Given an example from this chapter of the lack of accommodation 
and aggregation mentioned in this passage.
(c) 
Why is it necessary for parties to accommodate and aggregate 
variety of interests?
LET US DO IT TOGETHER
•  
This chapter covers the major developments in Indian politics until the 
2004 Elections (14th Lok Sabha). Subsequently, the Lok Sabha elections 
were held in 2009, during which the UPA led by the Congress won. In 
the 2014 Elections, the NDA led by the BJP emerged victorious. The 
position of various parties in the 16th Lok Sabha is given on page 193.
•  
A detailed study of Members of the 16th Lok Sabha is available on the 
website of the Lok Sabha (http://loksabha.nic.in).
•  
Compare and contrast the electoral performances of various political 
parties in the 2009 Elections (15th Lok Sabha) and the 2014 Elections 
(16th Lok Sabha) by collecting the data about the results from the 
website of the Election Commission of India (http://eci.nic.in). 
•  
Prepare a timeline of the major political events in India since 2004. 
Share and discuss it in your classroom.
2018-19
2018-19